{"https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/at-home/": ["The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child has a lot to say about your right to be at home and to live with your family In Wales, if your family needs help to look after you, they should get it  If your parents aren\u2019t looking after you properly, you should be protected.", "Home is where you spend a lot of your time. For most children and young people it\u2019s a safe place, but sometimes things don\u2019t go so well. You might not get on with the people you\u2019re living with, or someone might be making you feel unsafe. It doesn\u2019t matter what your background is and where you have come from. If you live in Wales, you have rights to make sure you are properly looked after at home. If you are not being properly looked after at home, or something else has happened which means you can\u2019t live at home, your rights are there to protect you."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/in-trouble/": ["You can be trouble in lots of different situations You have rights even if you are in trouble Your rights are there to protect you and make sure you are treated properly", "You may be in trouble with the police, but you still have rights. In fact, in Wales, anyone under 18 who breaks the law should be treated as \u2018a child first, and an offender second\u2019. This doesn\u2019t mean that you will be able to \u2018get away with it\u2019 \u2013 but it does mean that you will be treated in a way that is focused on you as a young person, and what is in your best interests. You may be worried about being in trouble at home or at school because you\u2019ve broken rules. You may be worried about the consequences of breaking rules, even if you haven\u2019t broken any laws, so we\u2019ve looked at what happens if you break rules, too.  In this section, we\u2019ve also got some information on what happens to you if you are the victim of a crime \u2013 if someone has hurt you or stolen something from you, or if you are asked to tell the police about what someone else has done."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/at-school/": ["All children in Wales have the right to an education You should be at school, or educated some other way, between the ages of 5-16 While you\u2019re at school, you will need to follow the school rules \u2013 but you have rights too", "You have the right to be educated. Your parents, or the people with parental responsibility for you, need to make decisions about how you will be educated. In Wales, this means choosing whether you want to be taught in Welsh or in English or a mixture of both. Parents may also choose to send you to a \u2018faith\u2019 school \u2013 a school with a particular religious character.  School is where most children go for their education, but it might not be the best place for you to learn. If you need special facilities to help and support you as you learn, you might go somewhere with those facilities. Your parents can also decide to educate you at home. As you get older, you will want to have more say in your education. You may want to go to a different school to the one your parents have chosen, or you might want to start going to school if you\u2019ve been taught at home for a time. In school too, there are things that will happen that you may want to challenge."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/relationships/": ["Your relationships are usually a private matter \u2013 but your rights are there to protect you if you get into trouble From a very young age you will find that you build relationships with many different people Relationships can be complicated, and you should feel able to ask for help if you are finding things difficult", "You have relationships with lots of different people \u2013 your parents, teachers, and other adults, your friends, other children and young people at school and where you live. As we get older, our relationships become more complex and sometimes it can be hard to work out where we stand, and what is right or wrong. Some people can trick us into behaving in ways that we don\u2019t want and we can end up getting hurt. You may be confused about your sexuality and what that means."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/work/": ["As a child, your main rights are to grow and develop as a child. You shouldn\u2019t have to work The UNCRC focusses on keeping you safe from exploitation by adults, rather than giving you rights if you want to work If you want to work, there are laws in Wales to make sure you are protected", "In Wales, your rights as you grow up are all about being safe, living with your family and getting an education. If you want to work, there are rules that mean that even if you are working, you can still get your education, and get the rest and play you need to grow up healthily. If you aren\u2019t being allowed to go to school or to play, and are being made to work for someone instead, this is wrong."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/play/": ["The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child specifically gives you a right to rest and relax It\u2019s more than just a right to chill out \u2013 it\u2019s a right to have all sorts of opportunities and experiences outside of school In Wales, your right \u2018to play\u2019 is recognised in lots of ways", "Having time to relax, play and have lots of different opportunities to experience different activities is part of growing up. The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child gives children and young people under the age of 18 a specific right to make the most of this. This is something that the Welsh government takes very seriously. The Welsh government recognises the right for children to experience the freedom and enjoyment of play and recreational activities, and is taking steps to make sure that all children have enough opportunities to play. Your rights also mean that you should be safe when you take part in these activities and that you should be treated the same as everyone else."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/online/": ["The internet offers huge opportunities - knowing what your rights mean can help you stay safe You should be in control of the information that you do share online and it\u2019s up to you to decide what information you share when you\u2019re online Your freedom to use the internet and post and share things shouldn\u2019t stop other people enjoying their rights", "The internet and the \u2018online\u2019 world is still quite new, and it changes all the time. It\u2019s an exciting place to be with opportunities to connect with friends, to discover and learn. It can also be overwhelming, and in some cases can provide others with an opportunity to harm you. \u00a0You need to understand what your rights are to stay safe.  Your rights to privacy, to be able to say what you think, and to be protected from harm as a child are balanced with the rights of other people. You need to make sure that you don\u2019t harm anyone else in the way you behave online."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/health/": ["The UNCRC gives every child the right to the best possible health and to doctors, hospitals and other facilities to help you if you are unwell You have the right to be involved in decisions about your medical care, and to confidentiality Your wellbeing is more than your physical health and your rights have a role to play here too", "No one wants to be ill or need treatment in hospital. If it does happen, you need to understand what your rights are and how you can expect to be treated. You may not want your parents to be with you when you see a doctor, or you may disagree with your parents \u2013 or with your doctor \u2013 about the treatment you should have. If you aren\u2019t well enough to go to school you may have to have special arrangements to make sure you can carry on with your school work."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/shops/": ["The UNCRC doesn\u2019t specifically mention shops and services, but your general rights should protect you if you are treated unfairly You are also protected as a \u2018consumer\u2019 \u2013 someone using services or buying good \u2013 by UK laws You may find that you are not allowed to do something or buy some things. These restrictions may also be included in laws designed to protect you and the public", "You\u2019ll be using services and going into shops from a very young age. Services include things like going swimming and to the cinema as well as things like health services, or the library. At first you will be with your parents or the people who look after you and care for you. As you get older, you will start to use services and go to the shops to buy things in your own right. If you are treated differently and unfairly for some reason, your rights under the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child may help you. You should be able to buy good and use services the same as everyone else, without being discriminated against.  If there\u2019s no discrimination, but what you have paid for isn\u2019t what you wanted, or is broken, you also have rights \u2013 as a \u2018consumer\u2019 \u2013 to return what you have bought and to get your money back. If you paid for a service and it isn\u2019t as good as it should have been, you may also be able to get your money back."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/on-the-street/": ["Your human rights don\u2019t stop at home or in school \u2013 even when you\u2019re out and about, you have rights The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child sets out human rights which can protect you In Wales, the law also protects you as a child.", "If you\u2019re out on the street, you need to understand what your rights are and what could happen if things don\u2019t go to plan. If you\u2019re out without your parents or an adult looking after you, there are lots of things you need to be aware of."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/at-home/my-rights/": ["As a child, The UNCRC gives you rights to make sure that you are properly looked after at home Your parents \u2013 or someone else responsible - should make sure home is a safe place, somewhere you can grow and develop Your rights are there to help when things go wrong for some reason", "Just because you are under 18 doesn\u2019t mean you don\u2019t have rights. The Welsh Government recognises that every child and young person living in Wales has human rights which are specifically related to you being under the age of 18. These rights are part of Welsh law. You have these rights so that you don\u2019t have to worry about who you live with and who cares for you. Even if things have gone wrong at home for some reason, your rights mean that you should be protected and looked after properly, and that anything that happens to you, if you have to be taken away from your parents, will be what is best for you.", "The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child sets out the rights that are specific to you as a child. It gives you the right to be brought up by your parents, and not to be separated from them unless there\u2019s a good reason for this. You have the right to be protected from harm too, so if your parents, or someone else living at home, is hurting you or not looking after you properly, your rights are there. The UNCRC states that any decision that is taken that affects you has to be \u2018in your best interests\u2019, and take into account your views about what should happen.", "Home should be a place of safety for every child and young person. Because \u2018home\u2019 with your parents should be the best place for any child or young person to grow up, your parents have the main responsibility for looking after you and helping you to grow up and develop. Many of the rights that you have as a child or young person in Wales are designed to make sure you live with your parents and are properly looked after by them.", "Sometimes, things go wrong, and there are organisations and people in Wales who are there to protect children. These organisations will get involved if necessary, to make sure you are protected from harm and looked after properly. Some of the organisations and people who may do this include social services and the local authority where you live, the police, courts and judges.", "If other adults and organisations need to be involved \u2013 perhaps someone you live with is hurting you or perhaps you have had to leave your home for other reasons - your rights are designed to make sure that those other adults and organisations protect you and do the best for you..", "If you need help right now, you should call 999 or speak to an adult you can trust \u2013 perhaps a teacher or another family member.", "An important part of having \u2018rights\u2019 is knowing how to use them. Your family \u2013 your parents and other relatives you are close to and members of your community, foster carers or guardians should help you understand your rights and how they can protect you as you grow up. At home, your rights are mostly there to protect you and your family. They are there to make sure you can grow and develop safely with your parents. Providing that this is happening, you shouldn\u2019t need to use your rights.", "This section of the website looks at lots of aspects of your life at home, including", "Decision and Rules at home What happens if you\u2019re not being properly looked after at home If you are caring for someone at home If you have extra needs for care and support What you can do if there is a problem where you live Your rights if you are away from home How you can be involved if your parents don\u2019t live together any more What you can do if you don\u2019t want to live at home"], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/at-home/my-parents-have-asked-someone-else-to-look-after-me/": ["Sometimes your parents may not be able to look after you for some reason They can make arrangements for someone else to look after you Your parents will still be responsible for you and may need to be involved in decisions about what happens to you", "You have a right, as a child, to live with your parents and not to be separated from them, Sometimes, though, your parents may not be able to look after you properly. One of them may have to go into hospital, or they may have to go and live somewhere else, may be abroad, where it\u2019s not possible or practical for you to go. Your parents can make arrangements for you to live with someone else for the times that they can\u2019t look after you. If they can\u2019t make that arrangement, the local authority may step in and help so that you are safe.", "Sometimes things go wrong for people. Something might happen which means your mum and dad (or whichever one you live with) can\u2019t look after you for a time. It might just be a couple of days or longer. They might have to go into hospital, or they might be with the police for some reason. A lot of the time, your parents may have been able to arrange for someone else to look after you. If they can\u2019t do that, the local authority can help by giving you a safe place to live while things are sorted out.  The local authority might also try to contact a relative or friend for you to stay with. If not, you may go and live with a foster family. If this happens, you should still be able to see your parents and they will still have parental responsibility for you.", "Your parents might ask someone who is a close relative or friend to look after you for longer than a few days. This is called \u2018Kinship Care\u2019 or \u2018Family and Friends Care\u2019.", "If your parents ask someone who is not already closely connected to you to look after you, this will be called a \u2018Private Fostering arrangement\u2019. Even if this hasn\u2019t been arranged by the local authority, the local authority should still know about what has happened so that it can make sure that you are safe.", "If your parents can\u2019t make these arrangements, they may ask the Local Authority (or the local authority may offer) to make arrangements. If you can\u2019t live with someone you are related to, or already know, you may stay with a foster carer.", "This is an important decision, even if the local authority is only going to look after you for a short time. You should be able to tell someone what you think and feel about this before the decision is made. When a local authority makes any decision about you, it should listen to your views and take them into account. It should make any decision in your best interests.", "There should be a plan in place about what will happen to you, even if it is only for a few days and then you will go back home. The plan should be reviewed regularly and changed if necessary so you are being cared for properly. If it turns out that the local authority needs to look after you on a more permanent basis, they must take action to put that into place so that things are more settled for you.", "If your parents don\u2019t want the local authority to look after you, the local authority will have to consider whether to get the police and the courts involved to make sure you are safe. This might mean that you have to live somewhere else. This would only happen if you were being seriously neglected or if your parents were harming you. You can find out more about this in the section \u2018My parents aren\u2019t looking after me properly\u2019.", "Sometimes, relationships break down, although no one is \u2018at fault\u2019. As you get older your ideas may be different to your parents\u2019 ideas and you may get to a point where you can\u2019t live together. If you are 16 or older, you might leave, or your parents might ask you to leave. Your local authority can help make arrangements for you to live somewhere safe, and will help you and your parents to try and improve your relationship. Eventually you may feel able to move back home. Even if you don\u2019t move back home, the steps you take to try and improve your relationship with your parents may help you get things back on track.", "You still have the same rights not to be separated from your family, and all the decisions about your care and where you should live start from the basis that \u2018your family\u2019 is the best place for you to be cared for, unless there are reasons why this shouldn\u2019t happen.", "If you are 16 or 17 and being looked after by the local authority with your parents\u2019 agreement, things change a little. The local authority can carry on providing you with accommodation even if your parents want you to go home. (If you are under 16 and the local authority is looking after you with your parent\u2019s agreement, your parents can stop this arrangement at any time).", "If you are 16 and do not want to continue being accommodated by the local authority, you can leave the accommodation and go and live somewhere else.", "If you\u2019re 16 or 17 and find yourself in a situation where you are \u2018homeless\u2019 \u2013 or at risk of homelessness \u2013 perhaps because your parents have asked you to leave home, \u00a0the local authority should recognise your right to be cared for by your family and try and help resolve any problems you have with your parents or the people with parental responsibility for you. If your family is treating you badly, you should be helped to find somewhere else to live.", "If you\u2019re 16 or 17 and don\u2019t want to live at home anymore, find out about alternatives here."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/at-home/decisions-and-rules-at-home/": ["Until you are 18, your parents should take care of you and bring you up They have to make big decisions about what happens to you \u2013 they may also make rules about how you all live together at home Your rights will protect you if your parents don\u2019t treat you properly as you are growing up", "Your rights as a child are to be brought up by your family \u2013 and no one should stop this unless you are being treated cruelly or neglected, or there is another reason why you can\u2019t be brought up by your parents. Your parents have the responsibility for working out the rules about how you live together on your home. Even if you don\u2019t live with your parents, there will be rules where you live. The rules are usually there to make sure everyone can live together safely in the same place. These may be strict rules which you can\u2019t change, or they may be more relaxed. It will depend on the person or people you live with.", "You make decisions about what happens in your life all the time, but lots of the \u2018big decisions\u2019 about what happens to you as a child or young person are made by the people with parental responsibility for you. As you get older you will probably be more interested in the \u2018rules\u2019 your parents set, and the decisions that affect you. You will also have more opportunity to be involved in the \u2018big\u2019 decision making, either because your parents or the people with parental responsibility involve you, or because you are given the right to make a particular decision.", "Every household has different way of working, but there is usually an understanding about what kind of behaviour is and isn\u2019t acceptable, and what everyone is expected to do.\u00a0 These might be specific things like keeping your room tidy or doing the washing up. If you don\u2019t live with your parents for some reason, there will be rules where you do live\u00a0 - even if they aren\u2019t called \u2018rules\u2019.", "As long as \u2018the rules\u2019 don\u2019t involve you being treated cruelly or neglected or harmed in some other way, it\u2019s up to the people looking after you what the rules are. In many families, foster families or children\u2019s homes, the people looking after you will talk to you about the rules and involve you in discussions about changing the rules.", "Again, it\u2019s up to the people looking after you what might happen if you break the rules although some people may discuss this with you, especially as you get older. Your parents are allowed to discipline you as long as it\u2019s not cruel or means you are neglected or harmed.", "You have the right to be protected from violence by your parents. At the moment, there is no specific law in Wales that allows your parents to hit, or to \u2018smack\u2019 you. \u2018Smacking\u2019 is the word that is often used when someone hits you as a punishment.", "Most of the time, if someone hits you, it is an \u2018assault\u2019 and the person who has assaulted you could get into trouble with the police. The law on assault says that if a parent hits you and it is a \u2018reasonable punishment\u2019 for something you have done, then it will not be assault. This is why people say that \u2018smacking\u2019 is allowed. \u00a0If one of your parents or someone who is your legal guardian does hit you, it has to be a \u2018reasonable punishment\u2019. Whether it\u2019s \u2018reasonable\u2019 will depend what you have done and why your parents are punishing you. Whatever you have done, a \u2018smack\u2019 should only leave you with red skin for a short time. If you are hurt more than this, your parents have gone too far, and it won\u2019t be reasonable.", "The law in Wales may change soon so that \u2018reasonable punishment\u2019 won\u2019t be allowed any more. When this happens, if one or your parents hits you, it will be assault.", "If your parents smack you harder than what is allowed as \u2018reasonable punishment\u2019 or if they hit you or hurt you in some other way, they will have broken the law. You have the right to be cared for without violence or abuse, so you should tell someone if you are being hurt by your parents.", "Find out more about what happens if your parents are hurting you.", "The only other person who could smack you apart from your parents or a legal guardian will be a person who is looking after you, and who has been given permission to smack you by your parents. This might be a grandparent or a private child minder. Your teacher can\u2019t smack you.", "No one likes to be told that they have done something wrong, or to have the decisions they have made questioned. Your parents (or the people you live with) should challenge you \u2013 it\u2019s part of their responsibility to bring you up and to care for you. However, if they do this in a way that is cruel or unkind, they could be breaking the law, especially if they always talk to you like this, even if they aren\u2019t telling you off. If you are worried about the way the people who are looking after you talk to you, talk to another adult that you trust about it.", "Although it seems that your parents make all the decisions, you will make decisions about your life all the time. Decisions about who to be friends with, decisions about what to watch on TV or what you listen to. Decisions to be kind or unkind and decisions about respecting the rules. It\u2019s true, though, that until you are 18, the big decisions are really made by your parents or other adults, including social workers and the courts depending on your situation.", "As you get older, you will be more aware of the decisions that are being taken about you and what they mean for you. You will start to be able to make more decisions yourself and will want to be able to be involved in decision making.", "Just because you don\u2019t live with your parents doesn\u2019t mean they won\u2019t be involved in making decisions about you. It will depend on why you aren\u2019t living with your parents, and whether someone else has parental responsibility for you as well as your parents.", "All mothers and most fathers in Wales have legal rights and responsibilities to look after their children. This is known as \u2018parental responsibility\u2019. More than one person can have parental responsibility for you.", "Your mum always has parental responsibility for you. Your dad has responsibility for you, as well as your mum, if he was married to your mum when you were born, or if he is included on your birth certificate. Your dad can also apply for parental responsibility. Your mum can agree that he has parental responsibility, or a court can order it. If your parents are in a civil partnership, or in a same-sex marriage, they can both have parental responsibility.", "Other people that can have parental responsibility with your parents a step parent, a guardian or the local authority.", "Your mother will always have parental responsibility for you until you reach 18 unless she dies or you are adopted.", "The person or people with parental responsibility must look after you and keep you safe. They must make sure you get an education, make decisions about any medical treatment you might need, they must give you a name (and agree to you changing your name), and must look after your property. This will usually be your parents but if your parents can\u2019t make decisions about you for some reason, then someone else with parental responsibility can make these decisions.", "As you develop and grow up, you will have views about what happens to you. This could include which school you go to, whether you follow a religion (or not) or about medical treatment. It could also include decisions about who you live with if your parents split up. Different procedures can apply depending on the type of decision that is being made. Your parents may start to include you in decisions as you get older. If they don\u2019t do this, you could ask them if you can be more involved in decision making. If it\u2019s hard to get them to listen, you could think about asking another adult to help you talk to your parents about this."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/at-home/im-not-being-looked-after-properly-at-home/": ["You should be protected and looked after by your parents and your family Your rights mean that if this isn\u2019t happening, you should be protected and cared for in some other way If you are looked after by someone else, you should still be able to have the same rights as every other child in Wales.", "Although it is your right as a child in Wales not to be separated from your parents, and to be cared for by them, you also have a right to be protected from violence, abuse and neglect. Sometimes, a child or young person finds that their parents, or other people living in the same house as them don\u2019t treat them properly. This could be because they aren\u2019t looking after you the way they should, or because they are doing things that hurt you. If this happens to you, there are people and organisations who are there to protect you. This could be by helping your parents look after you better, or by asking someone else to look after you for a time.", "In an emergency, a court may decide that it\u2019s in your best interests for you to be looked after by someone else. Your rights should protect you throughout this process. Your views should be listened to and taken into account, and decisions should be made in your best interests - so that what happens is the best for you.", "There are times when your parents may not be able to look after you, either for a short time or for longer. They can ask the local authority to help find somewhere safe for you to stay while this is happening. They might also make an arrangement with another family member or friends for you to live there. You can find out more about this in the section \u2018My parents have asked someone else to look after me\u2019", "Sometimes, the local authority will be told by someone else that you are being hurt or neglected at home. A teacher could be worried about you, or a doctor. It could even be a relative, a neighbour or a friend. If the local authority thinks that you might be being hurt at home, they should investigate this and find out what is going on.", "The local authority might ask a court to give it permission to look after you as part of this. It is your right to be cared for by your parents and not separated from them, so the local authority has to be sure that it would be better for you to be away from your parents. Your parents might agree that you live somewhere else for a short time while the local authority is investigating whether you should live somewhere else more permanently.", "Occasionally, the court will agree that you are in so much danger that you should go and live somewhere else straight away, even before an investigation has happened.", "Depending on the circumstances, if there is someone in your home who is hurting you, the court could make an \u2018exclusion order\u2019. This would mean that person would not be allowed into your home. The court would need to be sure that this would be the best way of keeping you safe.", "If you are being seriously neglected or if you are being hurt at home, the police might get involved to keep you safe. This is called being in police protection. If this happens, you should be told what\u2019s happening and why. The police should do what they can to find out what your feelings and wishes are \u2013 this should usually mean that they talk to you about what\u2019s happening, unless there\u2019s a reason why they can\u2019t.  If the local authority has permission from the court to collect you from your home and look after you, the court may agree that the police can be involved to make sure you can be collected safely by the local authority.", "In Wales, if you are no longer allowed to live at home, the local authority has to provide you with somewhere safe to stay. The local authority should try and see if you can stay with someone you already know. This could be a parent or someone else with parental responsibility. If this isn\u2019t possible, or wouldn\u2019t be in your best interests, you might be able to stay with another family member or family friend. If this happens, the person looking after you may become a Family and Friends foster carer. If this isn\u2019t possible, you may stay with a foster carer or be given a place in a children\u2019s home.  In some cases, the local authority may decide that you should be adopted. This means that you would permanently become part of a new family and your new parents would have parental responsibility for you. This will happen unless it would be better for you either to go and live with someone you already know or to live with a foster carer or in a children\u2019s home.  The local authority should ask you what you want and take your views into account when making these decisions.", "When the Local Authority is deciding where you should stay, it has to make sure you can stay at school and carry on your education as normal. If there is an opportunity for you to live somewhere with another member of your family that would be the best for you overall, this might mean moving schools if that person lives further away. This is all part of the balancing act that has to be carried out, and your views will be taken into account in all this.", "If you have brothers and sisters who are also going to be looked after, the local authority will look at whether you will be able to stay with them wherever you go to live.", "This is a document that sets out how you will be looked after. You may already have one in place, in which case you should have a copy. If you haven\u2019t got a care and support plan, the local authority has to work out what you need so that you can stay healthy and develop well while you are being looked after.", "A care and support plan should normally be put together before you leave your parents. If this isn\u2019t possible, it has to be in place within 10 days. Your care and support plan should be agreed with your parents and anyone else who has parental responsibility for you, or whoever was looking after you.", "If you\u2019re 16 or 17 and have asked the local authority to provide you with accommodation, you can agree your own care and support plan.", "There are specific things that have to be in your care and support plan. It has to include a long term plan for you, and has to consider your development and education, your identity, your relationships with your family and other people and how all your needs will be met.", "You should be given a copy of your care and support plan unless the local authority think you would be too young to understand it.", "If it looks like you need to be looked after for a long time, the local authority should apply for a care order to make sure you have certainty and a clear plan in place.", "If there is a care order in place, the local authority will share parental responsibility with your parents or the people that already had parental responsibility for you.", "You should still be able to stay in touch with your parents \u2013 if you want to \u2013 unless it would be harmful for you. You may not be able to spend time alone with your parents, especially if they have hurt you - but you could see them in a safe place when someone else is there with you, or you could have contact through phone or email. Staying in touch with your parents (often called \u2018contact\u2019) is your right, and not your parent\u2019s right. If you don\u2019t want to see your parent, that decision should be respected.", "Find out more about being away from home, and the contact you can have.", "You may stop being looked after because your parents are able to look after you again.", "If you are 16 or 17 and coming up to the point where you are leaving care, special arrangements should be made to help you as you leave care. This could include an agreement that you can stay with your foster family after you are 18, until you feel ready to move on. Each local authority will have its own arrangements about how this will work in your area.", "As you are getting ready to leave care, you should have a personal adviser who can give you practical advice and support and help you as you become more independent. Even if you aren\u2019t being looked after when you are 16/17 years\u2019 old, if you have been in care in the past, you may still get help and support as you turn 18."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/at-home/my-parents-dont-live-together/": ["You have a right not to be separated from your parents Even if your parents don\u2019t live together, you should still be able to have contact with both of them, if you want it You will be involved in any decisions a court has to make about who you will live with and the contact you have with your parents", "You shouldn\u2019t be separated from your parents unless there is a good reason for this. If your parents don\u2019t live together you may live with one of them most of the time, or share your time equally between both your parents. Even if you\u2019re not with one of your parents, you can still keep in touch with him or her if that\u2019s what you want.", "If your parents can\u2019t agree where you should live, the court might get involved to make a decision. If this happens, your opinion will be listened to.", "You have the right to stay in contact with both your parents, even if you don\u2019t spend as much time with one of them as you would like. The only reason why you might not be allowed to stay in touch with one of your parents is if he or she is hurting you, or it would be harmful for you to be in contact with them. This applies to all children, whether their parents are together or not.", "If your parents don\u2019t want to live together any more, they can try and agree where you will live. The decisions they make will depend on lots of things. If both your parents want to stay living in the same area, you may be able to split your time equally between your mum and your dad. If one of them wants to move to a new area, your parents may agree a different arrangement so you can carry on going to the same school during term time, but visit your other parent at weekends or holidays.", "If your mum and dad can\u2019t agree about where you will live, they will need to ask a judge in the Family court to make the decision. You will be asked about what your views are, and what you think will happen. An organisation called CAFCASS CYMRU will be involved and you will speak to a Family Court Advisor who will write a report that the court will see.", "No. You won\u2019t be asked to choose between your mum or your dad. The court will make the decision about where you live by working out what will be in your best interests. You will be asked about what you think, and what you would like to happen, but you won\u2019t be made to choose.", "You won\u2019t usually be expected to go to the court when the decisions are being made. If you would really like to talk to the judge who will make the decision you should let your CAFCASS CYMRU Family Court Advisor know that this is what you would like to do. They may be able to arrange it for you to speak to the judge about what is happening and about what you want.", "Both your parents are responsible for bringing you up, even if they don\u2019t live together. Your mum has \u2018parental responsibility\u2019 for you from the moment you are born, and in most cases, your dad will have parental responsibility too. If both parents have parental responsibility, they will both keep it even if they have split up and you don\u2019t live with one of them or see them very often. This means that they should both be involved in important decisions about you.", "You may decide that the new living arrangements that your parents agreed, or that the court decided, aren\u2019t right for you. If the court made an order about where you would live, this usually lasts until you are 18. If you are 16 or over and you don\u2019t want to live with the parent you are supposed to live with any more, it will be difficult for anyone to stop you going to live with the other parent.", "If you are under 16, you may be able to agree different arrangement with your parents. You could also talk to CAFCASS CYMRU to find out about changing the arrangements.", "If your mum or dad has been hurting you or not looking after you properly, the local authority may have asked a judge to make a decision that you should not be allowed to be in touch with that person. You will be asked by a Family Court Advisor from CAFCASS CYMRU about how you feel about this before the decision is made, but it will be the judge who makes the decision. He or she will have to make a decision which is in your best interests.", "If the parent you are living with is making it difficult for you to see the other parent, this is wrong. If you can talk to the parent who is making it hard for you to see your other parent, you may be able to work something out that means you do get tp see and spend time with your other parent. This is often called \u2018contact\u2019. If you can\u2019t talk to them, or you try and they won\u2019t listen, it might help to talk to another adult who you trust.", "The other parent can apply to court for contact with you, or, if this isn\u2019t possible, you may be able to apply for contact yourself. You will need to get legal advice about this, so you might start by talking to CAFCASS CYMRU who might be able to help you."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/at-home/my-parents-need-help-to-look-after-me/": ["If you have needs that are difficult to meet, you may need help, even if your parents and carers are doing their best to look after you Your rights as a child play a big part in making sure you are involved in these important decisions The local authority is responsible for assessing your care and support needs and for making sure you get the help you need.", "If you are disabled or have other needs that are difficult to meet, you can get help and support from the local authority. You have a part to play in this, and your rights are important to make sure your voice is heard in this process.", "In Wales, there are laws in place to make sure your rights are respected. You should be included in the decision making and provided with details of what the local authority will do to help you. As long as you have a full understanding of your situation and the decisions that have to be made, you can also refuse to have an assessment if you don\u2019t want to have one.", "In Wales, the local authorities have a responsibility to work out if you need extra care and support. This could be care and support as well as the care and support your parents are giving you, or instead of it. This could be because you have additional needs, or because your parents aren\u2019t looking after you properly. If you have additional needs and you need more support, but your parents are caring for you properly, the local authority should help your parents to look after you, either by giving you access to the services you need, or by making payments to your parents so that they can pay for what you need.", "If your parents aren\u2019t caring for you properly, there are other steps the local authority should take to make sure you are safe. You can find out more about this here.", "Your parents, or the people with parental responsibility for you may get in touch with the local authority directly, because they are worried about how they will manage to provide you proper care or meet your needs. This might happen in combination with discussions they have with doctors, or other people involved in looking after you, like teachers.", "The local authority has to look at different things to work out what care and support you need. The local authority has to find out what you\u2019d like to achieve, as well as what the people with parental responsibility for you, would like you to achieve. They have to take into account your age, and your understanding of the situation.", "You should be involved in the assessment. This will give you the chance to explain the help you think you need.", "You don\u2019t have to be assessed, but it is your right to have the assessment so you can get the help and support you need.", "If you\u2019re 16 or 17 you can refuse to have an assessment if you have full understanding about the decision you are making. If you do this, the local authority doesn\u2019t have to assess your needs.", "If you don\u2019t have full understanding about what the assessment involves, someone with parental responsibility for you can refuse the assessment if there\u2019s no other person who has been given the power to make the decision for you.", "The local authority can carry out an assessment even if someone with parental responsibility has refused, if the local authority thinks it\u2019s in your best interests, or thinks that you are being hurt or neglected or at risk of being hurt or neglected.", "If you\u2019re under 16 you can refuse an assessment as long as the local authority are happy that you understand the decision you are making.", "Someone with parental responsibility can also refuse an assessment of your needs. If someone with parental responsibility refuses an assessment, but you would like to go ahead with the assessment, then the local authority should listen to your wishes as long as it thinks that you fully understand the situation.", "The local authority can also go ahead with an assessment if it thinks it\u2019s in your best interests, or if it thinks you are at risk of abuse, neglect or harm.", "If you\u2019ve refused an assessment, but later change your mind, you can ask the local authority for an assessment and they should carry this .", "The local authority has a power to help you even if you haven\u2019t had an assessment.", "When your needs for care and support have been assessed, the local authority will look at your need for support and then work out whether it can help you. There are rules which set down the circumstances when the local authority can help you.", "If your needs relate to your rights, such as your right to education and to leisure time and spending time with friends or to your development, the local authority will have to help you if your family or a carer can\u2019t meet your need.", "In some cases, the local authority can charge for the care or support it provides. You won\u2019t have to pay the charge, but your parents or carers might have to pay it, depending on their financial situation.", "The kind of help you can get will depend on what your need for support is. The local authority will have lots of options open to it, to make sure you get the support that will help you best. The help you will get will depend on your situation and your care and support needs.", "If the local authority has to meet your needs for care and support, it has to create a care and support plan. The plan has to describe your needs and the sorts of things you want to happen longer term \u2013 your personal outcomes \u2013 that you discussed during the assessment. It also has to say what the local authority has to do to meet your care and support needs and help you reach your personal outcomes. If one of the ways the local authority will meet your needs is by making direct payments to you, these have to be included in the support plan too. The plan also has to say how the local authority will know if they are meeting your personal outcomes through the plan, and when the plan can be reviewed.", "If the care and support plan isn\u2019t meeting your needs for support, the local authority has to review it. You can also ask for a review of the support plan. After the review, the local authority has to decide whether to keep the plan as it is, to change the plan or close the plan.", "Yes, you should be given a copy of the support plan.", "You should also get a copy of the plan if it is changed after a review.", "If the plan is closed down, you should get a copy of the \u2018closure statement\u2019 which explains why the plan has been closed, and an explanation of how successful the plan was. If the local authority thinks that you still have support needs but that they can be met in other ways and not by help from the local authority, the closure statement has to explain these.", "Even if the local authority doesn\u2019t have to meet your needs for support, it still has to make sure that you\u2019re not being abused or neglected or at risk of being abused or neglected. Even if your care and support needs don\u2019t meet the local authority\u2019s requirements\u00a0 for providing care and support, the local authority should still help if it thinks you\u2019re \u00a0being neglected, abused or harmed, or at risk of this.", "Your situation will be unique, so you will need to get specific advice if you have needs for care and support that the local authority has told you it won\u2019t meet. If the local authority says it won\u2019t meet your needs, you can complain."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/at-home/i-dont-want-to-live-at-home/": ["As a child, you have the right to be safe at home If you\u2019re not being treated properly at home, you should be protected and found somewhere else to live If you don\u2019t want to live at home, there are people and organisations that can help you", "If you\u2019re under 18, your right is to live with your parents and to be looked after by them while you grow and develop and take advantage of your other rights \u2013 rights to education and to healthcare and to have time to be with friends and relax. It\u2019s not always that straightforward. If someone is hurting you at home, or if you\u2019re not getting on with the people you live with, you may not want to live there anymore. You already be living away from home, either in foster care or a children\u2019s home, and you may not want to stay their either.", "Your rights means you should have somewhere safe to live, with someone to look after you and to take decisions for you. If you want to leave home for some reason, then the people and organisations responsible for you have to make sure you have somewhere else safe to live. This could be your parents, or it could be social services at your local authority.", "Your parents have responsibility for you until you are 18 but once you\u2019re 16, you\u2019re considered old enough to make a decision to move out of home on your own. Your parents can\u2019t do anything to stop you moving out of home. No one like social services will force you to go back home if you leave. If you do leave home when you\u2019re 16 or 17, people (your parents, social workers, teachers) might try to persuade you to go back home if they think it is in your best interests, but no one can make you.", "If you\u2019re under 16 and you have somewhere safe to live and your parents agree, you can leave home. If you leave home when you\u2019re younger than 16, and you have nowhere to live, you could be at risk of harm. Your parents, the local authority and the police may try and find you. If the reason why you have left home is because you are being hurt or not looked after properly in some other way, the local authority should make sure you have somewhere safe to live. If you and your parents aren\u2019t getting on, you may be able to get support to talk through the issues you are having and try and sort things out so that you feel better about living at home.", "If the people you want to stay with agree, then it should be OK for you to stay there. If you\u2019re under 16, your parents will have to agree that they are happy for you to live there instead of at home. If there is a risk that you are going to be harmed or abused at the other house, your parents, or social services, might apply for a court order to get you to go home.  If you are in a relationship with the person you want to stay with and they are much older than you, or if you are under 16, you may be at risk of harm from sexual exploitation, and the police and social services have a responsibility to protect you from that. You can find out more in our section on Relationships.", "You may not be able to rent somewhere of your own without the help of social services or the housing department, until you are 18. Some landlords may be prepared to let you rent a property provided someone who is over 18 will act as a \u2018guarantor\u2019 and signs the paperwork.", "If you leave home or run away, you won\u2019t be in trouble with the police. Running away isn\u2019t against the law. The police would be more worried to find out what caused you to run away and whether someone has hurt you.", "They will also want to make sure that you are safe and not at risk of harm. If the police find you after you have run away, they can help you stay safe. If you tell them what is happening at home, they can get in touch with other people and organisations that can help you. The police may contact the local authority so that they can work out what is best for you. You can find out more about your rights and what can happen if you aren\u2019t being treated properly at home here.", "If you have run away because you are not being looked after properly by your parents or someone who lives at home, or you have been abused or neglected, social services will want to work out what they can do to help you stay safe. They have to do this if they think you need help or protection.", "If you\u2019re 16 or 17, you can ask the local authority for somewhere to live. They have to treat you as a priority especially if the reason you have left home is because of the way you are being treated. If you contact the housing team at your local authority, they may also ask social services to check that you are OK and work out if you have any care and support needs. If someone has been treating you badly at home, you can tell the police too. There are also advice and support organisations like Shelter Cymru who can help you.", "If you\u2019re under 16, you can ask for help from the local authority or from the police, or from organisations like Shelter Cymru. These organisations will all want to make sure you are safe and can live somewhere where you will be protected from harm.", "Until you are 16, your parents have to make sure you have somewhere safe to live. If you are 16 and they ask you to leave home, you probably don\u2019t have an option but to leave, even if you aren\u2019t sure you have somewhere else to go. You could try and understand why your parents have asked you to leave. It might be possible to arrange to see a family counsellor to try and sort things out so that you can stay at home. If you can\u2019t stay at home, the local authority should help you and find somewhere for you to live that\u2019s appropriate for you."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/at-home/i-care-for-someone-at-home/": ["In Wales, there are around 30,000 Young Carer and Young Adult Carers \u2013 all under the age of 25 You still have your rights as a child if you care for someone and you are under 18 If your need for support can be met by the Local Authority, then the Local Authority has to help you", "Although it\u2019s supposed to be your parents looking after you, sometimes, something happens which means you end up looking after one of your parents or another relative, perhaps a brother or sister, or a grandparent. As a Young Carer, or a Young Adult Carer (if you\u2019re over 16), you shouldn\u2019t miss out on being a child. You should still be able to have an education, to have time to relax and meet with friends, the same as every other child in Wales. It can be very hard if you\u2019re looking after someone at home, so you should have help to make sure you can benefit from all your rights.", "As well as being able to have all the rights that all children should have, in Wales, there\u2019s a lot of support available to help you in your role as a Young Carer/Young Adult Carer. Looking after someone else can be very stressful and worrying, especially if you\u2019re young. If you know there is support available for you, and for the person you care for, it can help you make decisions about your life. This support means you\u2019re more able to go to school, or to go to work if you need to, and to have time to meet friends and relax.", "You have the right to have your needs for support assessed by the local authority. This means that someone from the local authority will need to find out about what you have to do as a Young Carer/Young Adult Carer, and how this is affecting the rest of your life. The local authority can assess your needs even if you\u2019re not caring for someone at the moment, but will be caring for someone quite soon. For example, this could help if your mum or dad is going to be coming out of hospital and you know you will be caring for them.", "The local authority where you live is responsible for making sure that all carers know about their right to be assessed.", "The local authority has to look at different things to work out what support you need as a Young Carer or Young Adult Carer, and how you can get that support. As a Young Carer/Young Adult Carer the local authority has to find out what you\u2019d like to happen, as well as what the people with parental responsibility for you, would like to happen. They have to take into account your age, and your understanding of the situation.", "You have to be involved in the assessment. This will give you an opportunity to tell the local authority how being a Young Carer/Young Adult Carer affects you, and what you would like to happen.", "You don\u2019t have to be assessed, but it is your right, as a Young Carer/Young Adult Carer, to have the assessment so you can get the help you need.", "If you\u2019re 16 or 17 and refuse to have an assessment, the local authority doesn\u2019t have to assess your needs. Someone with parental responsibility for you can refuse the assessment if you don\u2019t have the understanding about the assessment, what it involves, and what the outcome could be, unless there is someone else who could make the decision for you.", "If you\u2019re under 16 you can refuse an assessment as long as the local authority are happy that you understand the decision you are making. Someone with parental responsibility can also refuse an assessment. If someone with parental responsibility refuses an assessment, but you would like to go ahead with the assessment, then the Local Authority should listen to your wishes as long as it thinks that you fully understand the situation.", "If you\u2019ve refused an assessment, but later change your mind, you can ask the Local Authority for an assessment and they should carry this .", "The person you care for will also be entitled to an assessment to find out what his or her needs are and what support they need. The local authority might combine the assessments, but you will normally have to agree to this.", "If you have other needs of your own, not just your needs as a Young Carer/Young Adult Carer, you can have an assessment for those needs. This assessment could be combined with the assessment of your needs as a Young Carer/Young Adult Carer.", "When your need for support has been assessed, the Local Authority should be in a position to know what you need as a Young Carer/Young Adult Carer. The local authority will look at your need for support and then work out whether it can help you. There are rules which set down the circumstances when the local authority can help you.", "If your needs relate to your rights, such as your right to education and to leisure time and spending time with friends or to your development, the local authority will have to help you if you can\u2019t manage on your own or with the help of others \u2013 either other relatives or friends who are willing to help, or other community groups.", "Sometimes, the local authority is allowed to charge for the support it provides to people. The local authority will have to look at the financial situation that affects you, your family and the person you are caring for to decide whether you should get the support without having to pay for it.", "The kind of help you can get will depend on what your need for support is. The local authority will have lots of options open to it, to make sure you get the support that will help you best.", "If the local authority has to meet your needs for support, it has to create a support plan. The plan has to describe your needs and the sorts of things you want to happen longer term \u2013 your personal outcomes \u2013 that you discussed during the assessment, and what the local authority has to do to meet your needs for support and help you reach your personal outcomes. If one of the ways the local authority will meet your needs is by making direct payments to you, these have to be included in the support plan too.", "If the support plan isn\u2019t meeting your needs for support, the local authority has to review it. You can also ask for a review of the support plan. After the review, the local authority has to decide whether to keep the plan as it is, to change the plan or close the plan.", "Yes, you should be given a copy of the support plan.", "You should also get a copy of the plan if it is changed after a review.", "If the plan is closed down, you should get a copy of the \u2018closure statement\u2019 which explains why the plan has been closed, and an explanation of how successful the plan was. If the local authority thinks that you still have support needs but that they can be met in other ways and not by help from the local authority, the closure statement has to explain these.", "Even if the local authority doesn\u2019t have to meet your needs for support, it still has to make sure that you\u2019re not being abused or neglected or at risk of being abused or neglected. The local authority also has to think about whether there is something else it can do for you. There might be other services available which reduce your need for support. The local authority might also be able to give you information or advice about other support in the community that isn\u2019t provided by the local authority.", "Your situation will be unique, so you will need to get specific advice if you have needs for support that the Local Authority has told you it won\u2019t meet. If the local authority says it won\u2019t meet your needs, you can complain."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/at-home/theres-a-problem-with-the-place-where-i-live/": ["The place where you live should be in good condition. This includes the house or building as well as the area where your house is As long as your parents are looking after you properly, you shouldn\u2019t be separated from them so that you can live somewhere that\u2019s appropriate \u2013 you should all live together You shouldn\u2019t have to worry about where you are living \u2013 this is something your parents should do, with help", "Every child in Wales has the right to live in good conditions. This is somewhere where you can develop physically, mentally, spiritually, morally and socially. You may live with your parents, with another family member or friend, with foster parents, or in a children\u2019s home. Wherever you live, it should be a place you can grow up safely. Sometimes the problem with where you live might be to do with the building itself, or with other people living around you.", "Home is usually tied up with who you live with and who looks after you. If you\u2019re under 16, you will probably be living with at least one of your parents, or in a \u2018family\u2019 environment with someone else \u2013 a relative, a family friend or a foster family. The place where you live should be appropriate for you to live and develop healthily. If the people you live with can\u2019t provide this for you, then the local authority should help them find somewhere to live that is appropriate for you.", "This section of the website is about your rights to live in good conditions with your family.", "There are lots of reasons why your family might not have a home. Your rights as a child to live in good conditions mean that if your family loses its home, the local authority should help your family and make sure you have somewhere to live. If you\u2019re under 16, or under 19 and in full time education and living with your parents (or a parent), the local housing authority has to treat your need for somewhere to live as a priority.", "If you are living in housing provided by the local authority or a housing association, there are standards that the accommodation has to meet that have been introduced by the Welsh Government. These standards cover all aspects of the house that you live in and should mean that if you are renting a house from the council or a housing association, it will be in a good condition for you.", "Even if you are living in a house or flat that is rented privately (not with the local authority or with a housing association), the landlord has to keep it in a good state of repair. The landlord also has to let you use the house without being disturbed. If he or she wants to come and inspect the house, they have to tell you in advance.", "\u2018Private\u2019 landlords in Wales have to be on a register. People who look after privately rented houses (which could be the landlord or it could be someone the landlord pays to look after the property) have to have a licence.", "You can check if a private landlord, or a person (an \u2018agent\u2019) who manages the property you are renting, is registered or licensed by going to the Rent Smart Wales website.", "If a landlord or an agent is causing you problems, you can report them through Rent Smart Wales too.", "If the place where you are living is in a poor condition and your landlord isn\u2019t repairing it, you can report them to the local authority. If the problems could have an impact on your welfare or your health or safety, the council can tell your landlord to make improvements to the building.", "There may be other people where you live \u2013 in your block, on your estate, down the road, who make it hard for you to live where you are living. If anyone aged 10 or over behaves in an \u2018anti-social\u2019 way, a court can make an order called an Injunction to Prevent Nuisance and Annoyance. If there are people behaving in an anti-social way in the area where you live, you or your parents can call 101, or get in touch with the local authority who can help deal with this.", "If there is a gang in your area, it can make life very difficult for you and stop you enjoying some of your rights, like the right to play and relax, and the right to meet up with your friends. If you are worried about gangs where you live, you or someone in your family, can talk to the police. Find out more in our section On the Street \u2013 Gangs.", "You (and your family) have the right to be protected from bad treatment because of your race or religion. If you\u2019re being threatened or bullied, your property is being damaged or you are being hurt or otherwise targeted because of your race or religion, it could be a race crime which should be reported to the police. If you are having to live with this sort of behaviour happening regularly, you can tell the police every time it happens.", "Even if the police can\u2019t prove that what is happening is because of your race or religion, it can still be a crime. If it can be proved that it is happening because of your race or religion, the person (or people) who is behaving like this could get a tougher punishment from the court.", "Your right is to live with your parents as long as they are caring for you properly, and you are not being neglected, abused or hurt in any way. If there is no one who can care for you, the local authority should provide you with somewhere to live. If your parents don\u2019t agree to this, the local authority can step in and ask the court for a care order. Although decisions about where you live will be made by a judge, your views and feelings will be taken into account. An organisation called CAFCASS CYMRU will help make sure your voice is heard.  Find out more about your rights if the problem with where you live is to do with the way other people in your home are treating you."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/at-home/im-away-from-home/": ["If you\u2019re in Wales but you\u2019re away from your home, your rights are there to protect you You have the same rights under the UNCRC as every other child in Wales \u2013 it doesn\u2019t matter if you lived here all your life or just arrived You can find help to get home if that\u2019s what you want, or you may be able to stay in Wales if that\u2019s better for you", "If you are a child in Wales, the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child is there to protect you. It doesn\u2019t matter whether you have always lived in Wales or have only recently arrived in Wales. Your rights are even more important if you are away from home and the people who should normally protect and look after you if you are under 18.", "You have a right to stay in contact with people from home even if you aren\u2019t living at home. If you\u2019re away from home, and living somewhere that has been organised by social services, your rights are there to make sure where you live is safe and that you\u2019re living in good conditions. If you\u2019re away from home because someone has taken you away and brought you to Wales and you are being hurt or abused, your rights mean that you should be protected from this treatment.", "As a child, it is your right to be looked after by your parents. They have parental responsibility for you which means they make most of the big decisions about your life. Your rights are all centred on you being able to live with your parents as far as possible. If they decide to move to Wales from another part of the UK, or from another country, your \u2018home\u2019 will be with them, unless there\u2019s some reason why it\u2019s not in your best interests to live with them.", "If you parents have split up and they have agreed who you will live with or a court has decided who you will live with, you are expected to live with that parent. If you want to stay, there will need to be a change in the arrangements that have been agreed. If the parent you live with has moved, or wants to move, to Wales which means you will be further away from your other parent and a place you might think of as \u2018home\u2019, you will still be expected to live with that parent unless you can work out a change to the arrangements. In some cases, the other parent might be able to apply to the court to stop the move.", "You can try and talk to the parent you live with to see if you can change things, or make different arrangements. If a court ends up having to make a decision about this, it should listen to what you want and will make a decision that it considers will be in your best interests about who you should live with - and where you should live.", "If you have been brought to Wales and made to work, or you are being abused, you can be helped to go home as long as you can find someone to tell about what is happening to you. If you have a chance to go out on your own, you could try and tell the police about what is happening to you. You could get in touch with an organisation like Childline or the Runaway Helpline.", "Even if you have been brought to Wales by someone who has treated you badly, or has given you to other people who have treated you badly, you may not want to go \u2018home\u2019 because of what might happen to you once you get there.", "As a child, you have all the rights of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, so any decision that is made about whether you should go home or not must always be in your best interests. If your home is somewhere else in the UK, but you are being treated badly there and don\u2019t want to go home, social services may get involved to work out what should happen next. They should always talk to you about what you want, and make decisions that are in your best interests.", "You may end up living away from home for a time for lots of different reasons. It could be because your parents can\u2019t look after you properly, or because someone hurt you at home. It might be because your parents and the people at home need extra support to look after you, and some of that includes you living away from home. You might also have to live away from home for a time if you have been in trouble with the police and end up in Youth Detention Accommodation.", "Depending on what the situation is and what is in your best interests, you should be able to stay in contact with family at home even if you are living with foster carers or in a children\u2019s home. The local authority who is looking after you has to make it easy and straightforward for you to stay in touch with your parents and other people from home that you want to stay in touch with.", "You can have visits from your family if you are in Youth Detention Accommodation. Different rules apply whether you are in a Young Offender Institution, a Secure Training Centre or a Secure Children\u2019s Home. You can find out more in our section about being in detention.", "Again, different rules apply depending on the type of Youth Detention Accommodation you are in, but you will be able to stay in contact with your family through letters and phone calls.", "If you aren\u2019t living with your parents, or with your brothers and sisters, or other family members, you may still want to keep in touch with them.", "Your rights as a child are focussed on you being looked after by your family. If your family don\u2019t look after you properly or treat you badly, public bodies like the local authority are there to make sure you are protected.", "Until you are 16, the arrangements that will be made for you to protect you will involve finding somewhere else for you to live where you will be safe. This could be with another family member or a friend, with a foster family or in a children\u2019s home.", "If you\u2019re 16 or 17 and you\u2019re at risk of being homeless because of something that\u2019s happening to you at home, social services and the housing department in your local authority should work together to find somewhere suitable for you to live. Because you\u2019re older, this might mean you get a flat or somewhere else that\u2019s more independent.", "If you\u2019re not being protected and you have run away from home, or you have run away from home because you don\u2019t like what\u2019s been organised to keep you safe,\u00a0 you may be putting \u00a0yourself at risk. The local authority may consider that it\u2019s in your best interests for you to stay in a Secure Children\u2019s Home for a time."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/in-trouble/my-rights/": ["You have rights even if you are in trouble with the police Your rights don\u2019t stop you being in trouble \u2013 but they are there to make sure you are treated properly Even if you are in trouble, decisions that are made about you should be in your best interests", "Being in trouble can mean lots of things \u2013 it can mean being in trouble at home or at school for breaking a rule or behaving in a way that someone with responsibility for you doesn\u2019t agree with. It can also mean being in trouble with the police because you\u2019ve broken the law.", "Breaking rules will have consequences, but they are usually less serious for you than breaking the law. Most of this section of the website is about breaking the law, but you can find out more about breaking rules here. Whichever situation you are in though, you have rights, and should be treated properly, as a child.", "If you\u2019re in trouble with the police, it is usually because you have broken a law or because the police think you might have broken a law. A \u2018law\u2019 is a specific kind or rule that has been decided by the government. The laws that we are talking about in this part of the website are rules the Government has made about what you can\u2019t do to other people, or to other people\u2019s property or possessions. It includes things like", "If you do something to break one of these laws, the police will get involved to find out what happened. If the police think there is enough information to prove that you did break the law, you may have to go to court where a judge will decide what happens to you.", "Stealing from someone (like taking their mobile phone or bike) Damaging someone\u2019s property (may be smashing a car window or keying a car) Threatening someone (like telling someone that you are going to hurt them or kill them) Hurting someone (hitting or knifing someone or something like that)", "The UNCRC includes rights to help and support you and make sure you are treated properly if you are in trouble with the police. These rights mean you should be treated with respect, and aren\u2019t treated cruelly. You have rights to protect you from harm if you have to be kept away from your family because of something you have done to break the law. You also have rights to make sure you get the right sort of help from someone who understands the law.", "As well as these specific rights, which are there to look after you if you have broken the law, your other children\u2019s rights still apply. This means that even if you have broken the law, and are in trouble with the police,", "You still have the right to education, to good healthcare and to all the other rights included in the UNCRC.", "In Wales, your children\u2019s rights, which come from the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC), are really important. In Wales, anything that happens to you if you\u2019re under 18 has to recognise your rights as a child as well as your human rights. Although the law about this kind of activity \u2013 called \u2018criminal law\u2019 - is the same in England and Wales, the way the law is put into practice in Wales may be different to what happens in England, to make sure your children\u2019s rights are respected.", "The people making decisions about you have to take into consideration what are your best interests You should not be treated differently and unfairly for a reason like your race or your sex, or because you have a disability, You should be involved in decisions about you, and be able to voice your opinion You should have enough information to help you understand what\u2019s happening to you, and what could happen to you", "The laws that apply in England and Wales about what happens to you if you\u2019re under 18 and have broken the law are all made by the UK Government in London, but a lot of what happens to you if you\u2019re in trouble with the police is decided here in Wales, and even by the Local Authority where you live. When the Welsh government works out how these laws should work in Wales it must think about your children\u2019s rights.", "In this part of the website, we explain your rights", "We also look at how you keep your other rights (like your right to education, and your right to have your voice heard) while this is going on.", "If you\u2019ve broken a rule (rather than a law) In relation to different ages (under 10, 10-17) If you\u2019re at the police station If you have to go to court And what might happen to you if you have broken the law When it\u2019s all over, and whether you have a \u2018criminal record\u2019", "Sometimes, people say that they are \u2018in trouble\u2019 when things are difficult, or they are in a complicated situation and they need help to work out what to do next. This is different to being in trouble because you\u2019ve broken the law or broken a rules \u2013 but it\u2019s important that you know what your rights are. We\u2019ve looked at this in other sections of this website.", "If you\u2019re \u2018in trouble\u2019 in a relationship \u2013 whether it\u2019s with other children or young people, friends or with a boyfriend or girlfriend, check out the section on Relationships.", "If you\u2019re \u2018in trouble\u2019 because of a situation where you live\u00a0 - may be something has happened to you at home and you can\u2019t stay where you are, you can find out more in our section about your rights \u2018At Home\u2019."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/in-trouble/more-about-what-might-happen-to-me/": ["Your rights under the UNCRC apply whatever happens to you if you get into trouble with the police In Wales, you should always be treated as a child first and an offender second The police and the courts hand the Youth Offending Teams must always think about what would be most appropriate for you in your case", "If you end up in trouble with the police, you may end up in court, but this isn\u2019t always what happens. There are different outcomes depending on what has happened, what you have done, how old you are and whether you have been in trouble with the police before.", "It\u2019s important to remember that even if you have done something wrong (or are accused of doing something wrong) you still have your rights under the UNCRC if you ware under 18.", "If you are charged with an offence by the police, you will have to go to court. If you are 17 or under you will normally go to a youth court. If what you have been charged with is very serious (for example, murder) you may be tried in the Crown Court and not the youth court.", "The court will hear evidence about what has happened and decide for themselves whether they think you did break the law or not. You can find out more about your rights at court, and what happens, here.", "If the court decides that you did break the law, you will be \u2018sentenced\u2019. This is where the court decides what will happen to you. Your \u2018sentence\u2019 is what happens to you after court, if the court has decided that you did break the law.", "The court has to think about you as a child and take into account your welfare. It has to act in your best interests and make sure that you will still receive education or training, and be protected from people or surroundings that could harm you.", "Any child or young person can be given one of the following by a court:", "Even if the court decides that you have broken the law, it may decide that you won\u2019t be punished", "The court decides you have broken the law but decides not to punish you straight away. The court will decide a period of time and as long as nothing happens in that time, you will not be punished.", "You have to make a contract with a Youth Referral Panel to take part in a number of activities. These could include making it up to the victim of your crime and repairing any damage you caused, or paying money to that person. You might also have to take part in training or counselling to help you recognise what you did and to help you not get into trouble with the police again.", "You \u2013 or, if you are under 16, your parents r carers, will have to pay a fine", "This is called a \u2018community sentence\u2019. You won\u2019t go to Youth Detention Accommodation but you have to carry out work in the community. You may also have to attend training or counselling to help you recognise what you did and to help you not get into trouble with the police again.", "A Youth Rehabilitation Order can also include things like a curfew, so you have to be in a particular place at particular times, electronic tagging, and you may be stopped form doing certain things.", "If you have been in trouble with the police before, and you\u2019re 12-14 you might get", "A Youth Rehabilitation Order with intensive supervision and surveillance", "This means you won\u2019t have to stay in Youth Detention Accommodation, but you will have to wear an electronic tag, and let people know where you are. You will also have to attend for \u2018contact time\u2019", "A Youth Rehabilitation Order with fostering", "You will live with a foster carer if the court thinks your behaviour is being encouraged by the people you normally live with.", "A DTO combines staying in Youth Detention Accommodation and working out in the community. You will also have to have training to try and help you stay out of trouble in future.", "If you\u2019re 10 or 11 you can\u2019t be given a DTO. You can only be given a DTO if you\u2019re 12-14 and you have been in in trouble with the police a lot before. You can be given a DTO is you\u2019re 15-17 and it\u2019s appropriate.", "An Absolute Discharge    A Conditional Discharge    A Referral Order    A Financial Order    A Youth Rehabilitation Order          A Detention and Training Order (DTO)", "If you have done something very serious, you could be given a \u2018sentence\u2019 to keep you in Youth Detention Accommodation. This could be a Youth Offender Institution, a Secure Children\u2019s Home or a Secure Training Centre. This is called detention. The Youth Custody Service will decide where the most appropriate place for you is.", "An adult prison will never be an appropriate place for you to be as a child.", "If you don\u2019t agree with the decision of the Youth Custody Service about the type of accommodation that they have given you, you can ask for it to be reviewed.", "If you are pregnant and sentenced to detention for long enough that you will still be in detention when you have your baby, the Youth Custody Service needs to make sure you go somewhere suitable for you.", "In some cases, children and young people from Wales may end up in Youth Detention Accommodation in England because it will be closer to home than the accommodation that is available in Wales. There is no Secure Training Centre in Wales, the closest one is in Rugby, England. The closest Young Offenders Institution to North Wales is in Werrington in Staffordshire, also in England.", "The Youth Custody Service has to take into account what will be in your best interests, and will need to think of things like whether you are a Welsh speaker, and whether you will be going back into the Welsh education system when your time in Youth Detention Accommodation is over.", "Even as a child, if you are found guilty of a sexual offence, your name could be put on the Sex Offenders Register. Your name will stay on the Register for half the time that an adult would stay on.", "It\u2019s usually in your best interests not to end up in court. Although sometimes the situation means that this has to happen, there are lots of other situations when you may not end up in court.", "If you have been arrested and you admit that you have broken the law, someone from the Youth Offending Team will get involved to think about alternatives. For example;", "If you admit you have done wrong and the police have evidence to prove that the crime was committed, you might be given a Youth Caution. This is a warning by the police, and is often given to children/young people the first time they are in serious trouble with the police. You have to have an \u2018appropriate adult\u2019 with you when the police give you a Youth Caution. You will be referred to the Youth Offending Team and the Youth Caution will stay on your criminal record.", "This is like a Youth Caution although there will be conditions attached. The \u2018conditions\u2019 will be things you have to do. A Youth Conditional Caution might be used if it\u2019s the first time you\u2019ve been in trouble with the police but what you have done is a bit more serious. It will go on your criminal record. You will be referred to the Youth Offending Team.", "This is a system where you can be taken out of the formal police processes, like cautions or being charged and going to court. Triage can be used if it\u2019s the first time you\u2019ve been in trouble with the police, or if you\u2019ve been in trouble with the police before for something that isn\u2019t very serious. You will be involved in activities focussed on you making up to the victim of your crime and to the community. You won\u2019t get a criminal record if you are involved in this kind of programme.", "Youth Caution    Youth Conditional Caution    Triage"], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/in-trouble/breaking-rules/": ["There are rules everywhere, which are usually there to make life better for everyone even if they are annoying to you Breaking a rule doesn\u2019t mean you will be in trouble with the police, although if you have also broken the law, the police could well get involved. You may be able to challenge a rule if it means it discriminates against you for some reason, or if it doesn\u2019t make sense", "There are rules everywhere. They are usually aimed at improving things for everyone, and to make sure that everyone is respected, even if it feels like you are being stopped from doing things that you want to do.", "There are rules your parents set at home \u2013 things like how much TV you can watch and whether you have to keep your room tidy. There are rules at school about what to wear, and how to behave in school. There are rules about crossing the road. Shopkeepers might set rules about how many children can be in the shop at any time. Swimming pools have rules about how to behave when you\u2019re in the water. Some rules aren\u2019t even written down, either, and you\u2019re just kind of expected to understand how you have to behave somewhere. Most of the rules we live with day to day aren\u2019t \u2018the law\u2019. Although there might be a consequence for breaking a rule \u2013 being grounded if you watch too much TV, or being kept in at break if you talk in class at school \u2013 you probably won\u2019t end up in trouble with the police.", "If you do break rules, you should still be treated with respect \u2013 just because you have broken a rule doesn\u2019t mean that you lose your rights.", "Your parents, or your carers where you live, can set rules about your behaviour. Every family and household will do this differently. Your parents are responsible for bringing you up and helping you develop so that you can play your part in the world as an adult. If your parents can\u2019t do this for some reason, then other people \u2013 may be foster carers or a special guardian, will have responsibility for this. As long as the rules, and the consequences for breaking the rules, don\u2019t put you at risk or cause you harm, your parents can set rules and consequences that they think are appropriate. If you don\u2019t agree with them, you can see if you can discuss it with them, or ask another adult to help you have this discussion.", "You have the right to be protected from violence by your parents. At the moment, there is no specific law in Wales that allows your parents to hit, or to \u2018smack\u2019 you. \u2018Smacking\u2019 is the word that is often used when someone hits you as a punishment.", "Most of the time, if someone hits you, it is an \u2018assault\u2019 and the person who has assaulted you could get into trouble with the police. The law on assault says that if a parent hits you and it is a \u2018reasonable punishment\u2019 for something you have done, then it will not be assault. This is why people say that \u2018smacking\u2019 is allowed. \u00a0If one of your parents or someone who is your legal guardian does hit you, it has to be a \u2018reasonable punishment\u2019. Whether it\u2019s \u2018reasonable\u2019 will depend what you have done and why your parents are punishing you. Whatever you have done, a \u2018smack\u2019 should only leave you with red skin for a short time. If you are hurt more than this, your parents have gone too far, and it won\u2019t be reasonable.", "The law in Wales may change soon so that \u2018reasonable punishment\u2019 won\u2019t be allowed any more. When this happens, if one or your parents hits you, it will be assault.", "The law in Wales may change soon, and smacking may be banned.", "You can read more about decisions and rules at home here.", "Every school will have its own system of rules and discipline which says how teachers and other school staff will deal with you if you break the rules. Things like being disruptive in class, not wearing the right school uniform, not turning up to school on time and not doing work or homework could all mean you get into trouble. You should be dealt with according to the school rules. If you keep on breaking school rules, you may end up being excluded from school, either for a fixed period of time, or permanently. This doesn\u2019t mean you can\u2019t go to school any more, just that you won\u2019t be able to go to the school that excluded you.", "Your teachers are not allowed to smack you.", "Click here to find out more about being in trouble at school.", "If your behaviour has broken the law as well as breaking any school rules, your school may tell the police about what has happened. This could include if you have hurt someone at school or threatened to hurt them or sold drugs at school. As well as the police, school might contact the Youth Offending Team, social workers or other organisations that might need to be involved. Even if the school doesn\u2019t tell the police, someone who has been hurt or threatened might tell the police. Find out more about this here.", "Outside of home and school, you may find different rules with different consequences. If the rule relates to someone\u2019s private property, then as long as the rule isn\u2019t breaking the law (and there\u2019s more about this in the section below \u2018Can a rule break a law?\u2019), that person is allowed to have the rule. An example might be a shop keeper who says he doesn\u2019t want more than 2 children in his shop at a time.", "Sometimes, you might find a rule that treats you unfairly. In some cases, this will also be breaking a law. A shopkeeper who makes a rule that only 2 children can be in his or her shop at the same time could be discriminating against children because of their age \u2013 but they are allowed to do this. On the other hand, a shop keeper who said nobody could go into the shop wearing a particular type of garment like a burka or a kippah could be discriminating against people because of their religion, and this would be breaking the law.", "Some rules made by local councils and some other public organisations in Wales are called \u2018byelaws\u2019. These are rules which only apply in a particular area or place, and will have consequences which are more serious than just breaking \u2018a rule\u2019. If you break a byelaw you might have to pay a fine or a fixed penalty notice. There might be some other consequence which could include having your property taken away from you. Breaking some byelaws could mean you end up with a criminal record.", "The best way to challenge a rule is to try and talk to the people who made the rule in the first place.", "Challenging rules at home", "As long as the rules at home don\u2019t put you at risk or mean you get hurt, the best way to challenge rules at home is to talk to your parents. As you get older, the more likely you are to want to live life your own way, and not the way your parents want. Talking to your parents about why you don\u2019t like the rules, and how you would like to change things, is probably the best place to start. If you have trouble talking to your parents, you might be able to explain your problems to another adult \u2013 may be a grandparent or an aunt or uncle, or a teacher \u2013 who could help you talk to your parents.", "Challenging school rules", "In Wales, most schools have a school council. If you think a school rule isn\u2019t sensible or appropriate, or if you think it is unfair, you can raise it with the School Council. If a rule discriminates against you, or a group of pupils for a reason such as your race or religion or your gender, then the school will be breaking the law.", "Challenging other rules", "If a local council is thinking of introducing a rule using a byelaw, they must ask people who live in the area what they think. If you find out about the plans for the rule, you could take part in this by writing a letter or an email with your views to the council or the organisation that is introducing the byelaw."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/in-trouble/my-rights-if-i-am-in-detention/": ["You should only be sentenced to detention in the most serious cases, and for the shortest amount of time possible While you\u2019re in detention, you still have all your children\u2019s rights to protect you and help you If you are treated unfairly while you are in detention, or think that your rights have been breached, you can complain", "Detention means that you won\u2019t be allowed to go home after you have been to court, and will go to a Youth Offenders Institution, a Secure Training Centre or a Secure Children\u2019s Home.\u00a0 If you\u2019ve broken the law, the court should only give you a sentence that involves \u2018detention\u2019 in the most serious cases.", "It may feel as if your rights are being taken away if you end up in detention. It\u2019s true that detention takes away a lot of your freedom, so that you can\u2019t put your rights into practice as often as you might like. You might only be able to see your family on certain days, and there will be restrictions on what you can do. But you still have your rights under the UNCRC, so you shouldn\u2019t be treated differently or less fairly to anyone else in detention. You should be allowed to keep in touch with your family, and to have access to education and healthcare. You should have your language and family traditions respected. You shouldn\u2019t be made to do anything that will damage your health and your development.", "As long as you want to see your family, you should be able to while you are in detention. Visits from your family might be limited to certain days or times, depending on where you are. Members of your family can apply for financial help to cover the costs of visiting you. Different rules apply depending on whether you are in a Young Offenders Institution, a Secure Children\u2019s Home or a Secure Training Centre. Find out more here.", "Your right to education is one of the children\u2019s rights that stay with you even though you\u2019re in detention. Whether you\u2019re in a Young Offenders\u2019 Institution, a Secure Children\u2019s Home or a Secure Training Centre, you should continue your education, and be able to get qualifications. Your detention may only be for a short period of time, so you should be in a position to be able to go back to school once it\u2019s over. If you will be looking for work once you come out of detention, the more qualifications and skills you have, the better.", "As with education, your right to good quality healthcare doesn\u2019t stop because you are in detention. Whether you are physically ill or mentally ill or vulnerable, you should receive the treatment and support you need to recover.", "You should be treated with respect. You should be protected from violence and abuse by the people caring from you \u2013 it is never acceptable for you to be treated badly, so if something is wrong, you should tell someone. This could be your legal adviser or solicitor, or someone who you trust \u2013 perhaps a teacher who works with you or another member of staff. You should have healthy food, and access to good healthcare, and you should be able to carry on with your education.", "Different types of Youth Detention Accommodation have different rules and work differently. If you\u2019re in a Secure Training Centre (STC) or a Secure Children\u2019s Home, you may be there with children who haven\u2019t been sent there by a court. They may be there because of other problems they are facing.", "A Youth Offender Institution (YOI) is most like an adult prison.", "Whether you are in a YOI or an STC, there are rules in place so you know how you can expect to be treated, and how you are expected to behave. Even though you are in detention, your rights as a child still apply, although they have to be seen in the context of your sentence.", "You can find out more about the rules in a YOI and the rules on an STC here."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/in-trouble/how-my-age-makes-a-difference/": ["If you\u2019re age 10-17 you are old enough to be responsible for breaking a law You have to be treated as a child, and not in the same way an adult who has broken the law If you are under 10, you can\u2019t be held responsible for breaking a law", "Until you are 10, the law in England and Wales says that you aren\u2019t old enough to understand if you have broken a law or not. This means that you can\u2019t be \u2018criminally responsible\u2019 for something you have done until you are 10 years old. This doesn\u2019t mean that nothing will happen if you do something to break the law, but it does mean that you will be treated differently to a child who is 10 or older who breaks the law.", "Once you are 10, the law in England and Wales says that you are old enough to understand when something you do might be breaking a law and is properly wrong, and not just \u2018naughty\u2019. This means that you can be taken to a police station while things are being investigated, and you might end up in court. You will have a chance to put your side of the story, but if the court decides that you have broken the law, a judge will decide what happens to you.", "You will be treated as a \u2018child\u2019 \u2013 and your children\u2019s rights apply - until you are 18.", "\u2018Criminal responsibility\u2019 means that you can understand that you have broken the law and done something seriously wrong and can be punished for doing this. The \u2018age of criminal responsibility\u2019 is the age when you are assumed to have this understanding.", "In England and Wales, the age of criminal responsibility is 10. In Scotland it is 8 although this is likely to increase to 12 during 2018. In lots of other European countries, the age of criminal responsibility is older. The Welsh government can\u2019t change the age of criminal responsibility on its own \u2013 at the moment this is something that is decided by the UK parliament in London.", "If you break a law before you are 10 years old, you don\u2019t have \u2018criminal responsibility\u2019 so you won\u2019t get into trouble with the police in the same way as if you are 10 or older. This doesn\u2019t mean that nothing will happen to you.", "You could get a Child Safety Order (CSO). A CSO can include a curfew, but can also include things like staying at home after a certain time at night and always going to school unless there\u2019s a good reason why you can\u2019t (like being ill).", "Until you are 18, your mum and dad, are responsible for you and for bringing you up, so if you get into trouble with the police a lot, a Court might decide that your mum or dad (or both), a step parent or a grandparent depending on who cares for you might need some support and encouragement to deal with your behaviour.", "They could be asked to go on a parenting programme, asked to sign a parenting contract or might even be given a parenting order by a court to get them more involved in trying to keep you out of trouble. If a court gives someone who cares for you a parenting order and they don\u2019t stick to it, they could end up being taken to court themselves.", "If you have a birthday between the date when you are charged with breaking the law, and the date that you go to court, you will normally be treated as if you are still the age you were when you committed the offence.", "If the court decides that you did do what you are accused of, you will receive a \u2018sentence\u2019 which explains what will happen to you \u2013 whether you have to go into Youth Detention or whether something else will happen. The sentence you will be given, if found guilty of an offence, varies depending on your age. You can read more about different types of sentencing here.", "If you are 17 when you break the law, but turn 18 before your case gets to court, and the court finds that you did break the law, the court can usually only give you the same sort of sentence as it could have done when you were 17. The court has to take account of different guidelines when it is sentencing someone who is over 18, so you may end up with a sentence at the more serious end of the punishments you might receive as a \u2018child\u2019.", "The same applies if you are 11 or 14 when you break the law and then have a birthday so that you are 12 or 15 when you go to court (if you do go to court). The court can usually only give you a sentence that would have applied if you hadn\u2019t had your birthday.", "So if you are 11 when you commit the offence and 12 when you go to court, you can\u2019t be given a Detention and training Order; and if you are 14 when you break the law but 15 when you go to court, and it\u2019s the first time you\u2019ve been in trouble with the police, you wouldn\u2019t get a Detention and Training Order or a Youth Rehabilitation Order with surveillance and supervision or with fostering."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/in-trouble/what-happens-afterwards/": ["If you\u2019re still under 18 when your punishment finishes, you might need support to get back on track Your rights apply all the time you are in contact with the police, or in detention, and afterwards Where you will live and what you will do might all be worrying you \u2013 knowing your rights will help", "The thought of leaving detention, or getting back to normal after your sentence is over, might be just as worrying and confusing as when you were first in trouble. You may find that you need extra help to get \u00a0back into school if you were in detention, get somewhere to live or get a job, but there are people and organisations who will help you.", "If you end up spending time in a Young Offender Institution or Secure Training Centre after being in trouble with the police, right from the start, you should be helped to prepare for life once you\u2019re released.", "If you get a formal punishment, which could include a caution, and any time you spend in Youth Detention Accommodation, these will be part of a criminal record. All the details will be kept on the National Police Computer until you are 100 years old.", "If you\u2019ve been in Youth Detention Accommodation, you might be worried about where you will live when you come out. If you can go back home to live with your family, there is nothing to stop this. If you were having problems at home before you went into detention, or there\u2019s a reason why you can\u2019t go back to your family, the local authority needs to make arrangements for you to have somewhere to live. If you\u2019re under 18, you have the same right as any other child to live in good conditions.  If you can\u2019t go back to your family when you leave detention and you are at risk of being homeless, the local authority must help you.  Find out more in our section At Home.", "Unless you have to be in detention, you should be able to carry on with school. If you can\u2019t go to school, a pupil referral unit may be the best place for you to carry on with your education while you\u2019re working through any sentence that doesn\u2019t involve being in detention.", "If you were in a Young Offender Institution, a Secure Training Centre or Secure Children\u2019s Home, you should have been able to carry on with your education, so you should be able to go back to school, or to carry on your education some other way. If you can\u2019t go to school for some reason \u2013 perhaps because you were permanently excluded, or because it\u2019s too difficult after being in trouble with the police, a pupil referral unit again might be a good option.", "A criminal record shouldn\u2019t stop you going to college or university, but you will probably be asked if you have any criminal convictions when you apply. You will only need to tell them about any \u2018unspent convictions\u2019 (explained in more detail below), although for some courses, you may need to give information about any convictions you have had, including \u2018spent\u2019 convictions. This will be if you might have to work with children or other vulnerable people as part of your course.", "You might be asked more details about the conviction and what happened, before the college or university makes a decision about whether you can have a place. If you don\u2019t get a place and you think it\u2019s because of your criminal record, you may be able to appeal the decision.", "If you\u2019re over school leaving age, you can look for a job and start work like anyone else. You may be asked about your \u2018criminal record\u2019, and you only have to tell employers about anything that isn\u2019t \u2018spent\u2019. You may be asked to complete a DBS check. You will have to fill in a form and provide information which identifies you, and the employer will send this off to obtain information about any relevant convictions. This is more likely to be the case if you are hoping to work with children, vulnerable adults, or in a job which requires a good deal of trust.", "Spent convictions are old convictions that you don\u2019t have to tell a future employer or education institutions about unless you want to work in a particular kind of job, such as with children or vulnerable adults.", "Once your punishment has finished, a record of what happened stays available for a certain period of time \u2013 this is called a \u2018rehabilitation period\u2019. How long the rehabilitation period lasts depends on how old you were at the time, and what the punishment was.", "Even if you don\u2019t have to spend time in Youth Detention Accommodation, but have some other kind of punishment, there may be a short rehabilitation period linked to it:", "If you apply for a job where old convictions might matter, your employer might ask for enhanced disclosure \u2013 to see all your past convictions including ones which are \u2018spent\u2019. The employer needs to make sure that the people you will be working with are protected \u2013 but this has to be balanced with your right to privacy.", "Time in Detention Rehabilitation Period   4 years or more ongoing \u2013 if you are asked, you must always tell an employer about a sentence   30 months \u2013 4 years 3.5 years   6-30 months 2 years   6 months or less 18 months   Detention and Training Order 18 months \u2013 2 years   Youth Rehabilitation Order 6 months        Referral Order\u00a0  Length of the Order   Fine 6 months   Compensation Order once the compensation is paid in full   Conditional Discharge length of the order   Absolute Discharge none   Youth Conditional Caution 3 months   Youth Caution none", "An unspent conviction is one that you have to tell a future employer about. Different types of punishment are unspent for different periods of time. If you were given a custodial sentence and were kept in detention for 4 years or more, you will always have to tell an employer about it.", "You may have to tell an organisation about your previous convictions if you want to volunteer with them, especially if you will be working with children or vulnerable adults. You may be asked to complete a DBS check.", "The Police National Computer holds information about all your previous convictions until you are 100 years old. You can make a \u2018subject access request\u2019 to ACRO Criminal Records Office to find out what your criminal record is. It will cost \u00a310."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/in-trouble/being-at-the-police-station/": ["If you\u2019re taken to a police station, you have to be treated in accordance with your rights There are rules about how long you can be kept at a police station and about how you must be treated while you are there Your children\u2019s rights mean that you have to be treated appropriately for your age when you are at the police station", "As long as you\u2019re under 18, you will be treated as a child/young person by the police. This means that alongside the rules about how you should be treated if you are in trouble with the police, your UNCRC rights as a child apply. You can\u2019t be treated differently and unfairly compared to anyone else because of things like your race or your sex or because you have a disability. The police also have to consider your best interests (even though you might have broken the law), to give you enough information so that you know what is happening to you, and to listen to you.", "The police might ask you to go to the police station to answer questions about what has happened, or they may already think they have enough evidence to arrest you for breaking the law. If they arrest you, then you have to go with them. If they just want to ask you questions about what happened, you don\u2019t have to go.", "If you are arrested it means that the police think you were involved in breaking the law and want to ask you more questions about it. If you are arrested, the police can keep you at the police station to ask you questions. You can only be asked questions if there is an \u2018appropriate adult\u2019 with you who can help you understand what is going on, and a solicitor to give you legal advice.", "You are allowed to ask the police to let a relative or a friend know what has happened to you.", "As well as your right to ask the police to let someone know where you are, the police have to find out who is responsible for looking after you, and then they have to tell them what has happened. They must tell them that you\u2019ve been arrested, why you\u2019ve been arrested and where you are.", "The police might put you in a cell in the police station while they are trying to make arrangements before they ask you questions. They have to try and tell your parents or carer what has happened and make arrangements for an appropriate adult to be with you before they can ask you questions.", "You shouldn\u2019t be kept in a cell with an adult who is also being kept at the police station because they might have broken the law, unless it\u2019s a relative, or someone who the police think has been involved in the same thing as you.", "If you\u2019re a girl, the police should make sure there\u2019s a woman to look after you.", "You can\u2019t be treated cruelly while you\u2019re at the police station. You should be able to go to the toilet, to have food and something to drink. When you are first taken to the police station, you should be told about your rights while you\u2019re there by a policeman called the Custody Officer, and there should be a written notice about your rights to go to the toilet and to have food. The notice will be in Welsh and in English. If you need to see this notice in a different language, the police should provide it for you.", "The police can keep you at the police station for 24 hours, and they can ask a court to keep you there for longer if they think they need more time to ask you questions.", "The police\u2019s job is to ask you questions and find out what has happened. They are trying to work out if you did break the law or not. To do this, they are allowed to", "There are rules about how the police must treat you if they do any of these things, all of which have to respect your rights. The appropriate adult who is with you at the police station should make sure that the police follow the rules.", "Ask you questions Take your photograph Take your fingerprints Search you Take samples of your DNA, Take samples of your hair and your saliva if you (and your parents or guardian) agree, unless you have been charged, when they can take the samples without your permission Take samples of your blood and urine, if you (and your parents if you are aged 14-17, or your parents if you are under 14) agree \u2013 even if you have not been charged.", "You can have a solicitor with you who will give you legal advice about what\u2019s happening and about what could happen to you. You must also have an \u2018appropriate adult\u2019 with you who will make sure you are properly looked after and understand what is going on at the police station.", "A solicitor is someone who understands what the law is and will be able to give you advice about whether you have broken the law and how to talk to the police. If you don\u2019t have a solicitor or know where to get one, you can ask the police to see the duty solicitor.", "Your solicitor will work for you, and not for the police.", "You don\u2019t have to pay for a solicitor to give you advice at the police station.", "However old you are, being at a police station because you might have done something wrong can be frightening and confusing.\u00a0 An \u2018appropriate adult\u2019 is someone who can be with you at the police station to make sure you understand what is happening while you are there. It\u2019s their job to make sure that the police act fairly and respect your rights. Your appropriate adult should help you to talk to the police and anyone else who might be involved.", "You can also have an appropriate adult with you if you are 18 or older, but have learning needs that mean you need extra support to understand what is happening.", "Your appropriate adult could be your parent or carer, a social worker or someone from a Youth Offending Team, but if none of these people are available, it could be any responsible person over 18 years old. It can\u2019t be anyone else who might be involved in what\u2019s happened.", "It can\u2019t be someone in the police or who works for the police, so if the police say they can\u2019t find anyone else and it will have to be someone from the police station, this is wrong.", "If you\u2019ve already told someone, like your mum or dad or social worker, that you have done what the police say you\u2019ve done, that person can\u2019t be your appropriate adult.", "If you don\u2019t get on with your parents, and say that you don\u2019t want them to be your appropriate adult, the police must find someone else, even if your mum or dad wants to be your appropriate adult. It\u2019s your decision.", "You should have an appropriate adult with you even if you haven\u2019t been arrested but have been asked by the police to answer questions about something that has happened.", "If you\u2019ve been arrested on the street and taken to the police station, you should have an appropriate adult to be with you as soon as possible. The police shouldn\u2019t talk to you about what has happened and ask you questions unless you have an appropriate adult with you.", "You can speak to your appropriate adult in private at any time \u2013 and you should be told this by the police who are holding you.", "You should be able to answer questions in English or Welsh. If you speak a different language, the police should make sure you have an interpreter available so you can communicate properly with the police.", "If you are \u2018charged\u2019 with an offence it means that the police think they have enough evidence to go to court and prove that you have broken the law.", "If you are charged with an offence, the police can decide whether you can go home or not. In most cases, you should be able to go home and live there before your court case, or any other action is taken. This is called \u2018bail\u2019. If you are on bail, you may have to follow certain rules, like not go out after a certain time at night, and report regularly to a police station or somewhere else.", "If the police decide that you can\u2019t have bail, a court needs to decide what happens, and sometimes this won\u2019t happen till the next day. You shouldn\u2019t be kept in a prison cell, and the police should make arrangements with the local authority for you to stay somewhere that is suitable, or make arrangements for you to go to Youth Detention Accommodation", "If you are arrested and are still being asked questions, you could be kept in a police cell overnight, but this should only happen if\u00a0 there is no where else for you to go.", "If you are arrested, the police don\u2019t have to charge you, even if you have told them that you did break the law. You might be given a youth caution, or if you have admitted to the police that you did break the law, the police will talk to the Youth Offending Team in your area to discuss whether \u2018Triage\u2019 is appropriate. You can find out more about this in the section \u2018What Might Happen to Me\u2019.", "In Wales, some areas have a system called Bureau. If you have been arrested by the police and released on bail, you don\u2019t have to go back to the police station but you will have to meet with a panel of 3 people including someone from the police and someone from the Youth Offending team and they will decide what will happen."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/in-trouble/ive-been-treated-unfairly/": ["Even if you\u2019ve broken the law, you must still be treated fairly Your rights under the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child all apply, as well as other Human Rights If you are treated unfairly while you\u2019re in the Youth Justice system, you should be able to complain", "It\u2019s easy to think that may be you don\u2019t have rights anymore if you have got into trouble with the police, but all your right still apply. In Wales, the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child has been adopted by the Welsh Government, so you should always be treated in a way that respects your rights.", "Your right not to be treated differently and unfairly applies to everything that happens when you are in trouble with the police. It doesn\u2019t matter what you\u2019ve done, you should be treated the same as everyone else in the same position.", "If you think that someone is treating you in a way that doesn\u2019t respect your rights \u2013 perhaps you\u2019re being separated from others too much, or not allowed contact with your family, or perhaps you are even being hurt by someone who is supposed to be looking after you\u2013 while you are in the police station, you can complain. Where you are depends on how you can complain and who you should complain to.", "To complain about how you have been treated while you are at the police station, you have to contact the police force that dealt with you. In Wales there are 4 police forces:", "Dyfed-Powys", "Gwent", "North Wales", "South Wales", "If you don\u2019t think the police force responsible have dealt with your complaint properly, you can appeal to the Independent Office for Police Conduct.", "Your rights include the right to live in good conditions, and include the right to eat healthy food and to have proper healthcare, as well the right to education. In Wales, the organisations and people involved in your detention should understand this. You may be in Youth Detention Accommodation for a short period, or for longer, but your rights should still be respected. The rules that say how Youth Detention Accommodation should be run should cover these rights, and you can complain if these rules are broken. Complain about treatment in a Youth Offender Institution You can complain to the governor of the YOI where you are being held, or to the Board of Visitors. You can make your complaint face-to-face by talking to them, or in writing. Complain about treatment in a Secure Training Centre You can complaining to the governor, or to an independent person. You might have an independent visitor who comes to make sure you\u2019re being treated properly. You could tell him or her if you have any complaints.  Once you have followed the internal complaints procedure at the YOI or STC, and if you are still unhappy about the result, you can complain to the Prisons and Probation Ombudsman. Complain about treatment in a Secure Children\u2019s Home Secure Children\u2019s Homes are run by local social services. You can check with the people in charge whether there is an internal complaints procedure within the home. If you are still unhappy, you can make a complaint to the Local Authority in charge of the Secure Children\u2019s Home.\u00a0 You could also talk to your independent visitor.", "You can appeal against a decision of a court. You will need to talk about this with your legal representatives about whether the court hearing was unfair or the decision was wrong. There are only certain reasons you can appeal against a court decision.", "If you think you were treated unfairly or rudely by someone working at the court doing administration, or want to complain about the facilities at the court, you can complain to HM Courts and Tribunals Service.", "If you want to complain about the way a judge treated you (but not about the decision he or she made), you need to complain to the President of the Court you were sentenced in. You can find out more here."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/in-trouble/being-in-court/": ["Your rights protect you even if you have to go to court for breaking the law It can be a confusing and frightening experience, so knowing your rights should make you feel more confident Your rights won\u2019t get you out of trouble, but they are there make sure you are treated properly and fairly", "If the police decide to charge you with an offence, you will go to court. This will usually be the youth court, which is set up especially for children and young people. Sometimes, if what you have done is very serious, or someone else who is 18 or over was involved in breaking the law with you, you may have to go to the Crown Court.", "Just as your rights apply when you are at the police station, they also apply when you are in court. The court has to consider what\u2019s in your best interests. You shouldn\u2019t be treated any differently to anyone other child or young person who has broken the law, and you should have a chance to put across your side of what happened. You should be given all the information you need to understand what\u2019s happening. You also have specific rights that make sure you have legal help in court, and are treated properly when the court decides what should happen to you.", "If you\u2019ve been asked to go to court because of something that has happened to you, go to our section on what happens if you are a victim of a crime. If you\u2019re worried about going to court because of something that\u2019s happening in your family, you can find out more in our section about your rights At Home.", "No \u2013 not always. The police have lots of other ways they can deal with you, depending on what you have done and whether you are often in trouble with the police or not. You probably will go to court if you don\u2019t agree that you have broken the law, or if what you have done is so serious that it can\u2019t be dealt with another way by the police.", "Most people will have a solicitor to represent them at court. You may also have a barrister if the case is complicated or you are in the Crown Court.", "If you don\u2019t have a solicitor, you can get Legal Aid which will pay for you to be helped at court by the Duty Solicitor. You should also get Legal Aid in most criminal cases if you are under 18.", "If you\u2019re under 16, your parents or the person responsible for you, must be there. If you\u2019re 16 or 17, your parents must go to court with you if there\u2019s an order for them to be there. Sometimes, as well as punishing you for breaking the law, the court will ask your parents or the person responsible for you to behave in a certain way, to help you.", "You solicitor will advise you about what will happen in court and when to speak. You can plead \u2018guilty\u2019 \u2013 which means you accept that you broke the law. You can also plead \u2018not guilty\u2019 \u2013 which means that you don\u2019t accept that you broke the law.", "If you plead not guilty, you will have the opportunity to tell the court your side of the story. If it wasn\u2019t you, or if there was a reason why you did what you did, which you think means you shouldn\u2019t be punished.", "If you plead guilty, you may be asked to give information about yourself before the court decides what should happen to you.", "If you don\u2019t know whether to plead guilty or not guilty, you can ask for an adjournment so you can talk to your solicitor.", "Most children and young people who go to court will go the youth court. These are specially designed for children and young people and should help you feel more relaxed. In most cases, the youth court is a better place for a child who has broken the law, although in some cases, you might go to a Crown Court (an adult court). This would only happen if it was necessary. This might be because you were involved in breaking the law with an adult whose case is being heard in the Crown Court. You will also go to Crown Court if what you are accused of is very serious \u2013 murder or rape for example. If you do have to go to the Crown Court, in practice, changes may be made to the usual procedure to make sure that you understand what is going on.", "If you are 16 or 17, and have been involved in certain offences, such as firearms offences, you may be sent to the Crown Court.", "No \u2013 the court has lots of different options and detention (in a secure children\u2019s home, a secure training centre or a Young Offender Institution) is only one of them. You can find out more in the What Might Happen to Me section.", "Youth Court proceedings aren\u2019t open to the public. There is also a rule which means that when you are in court, information should not be reported in the papers or on the TV, radio\u00a0 or online that can identify you or might identify you. This applies even if you are not in trouble yourself but are giving evidence in another case.", "If you have to go to the magistrates court or the Crown Court, the court can stop this sort of information being reported. The court has to think about what is in your best interests when it makes this decision."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/at-school/my-rights/": ["School is where most children and young people spend a lot of their time. It\u2019s the main way that the Welsh Government ensures that you get your education While you are at school you\u2019ll be expected to behave in a certain way and follow school rules \u2013 but even if you don\u2019t, you still have rights You shouldn\u2019t be treated unfairly either when you and your parents are choosing which school you should go to, when you are at school, or even when you are in trouble for breaking school rules", "All children and young people in Wales have the right to education \u2013 so although this section of the website talks about \u2018school\u2019, where most children get their education,\u00a0 your rights will apply if you\u2019re at a Pupil Referral Unit, or being taught somewhere else like a Young Offenders Institution or in a Secure Children\u2019s Home or Training Centre.", "It\u2019s important that you know that your rights under the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) apply while you\u2019re at school. Even though there will be school rules, these have to take into account the UNCRC rights.", "Thanks to the UNCRC and the European Convention of Human Rights:", "These rights relate specifically to school, but there are other rights in the UNCRC that should make sure school is a good and fair place to be.", "You have a right to education School discipline needs to respect your rights and your dignity Your education should allow you to develop and prepare you for your life as an adult. You should be encouraged to respect your own culture and the culture of other people    You shouldn\u2019t be treated unfairly for any reason Decisions that are taken about you should be based on what will be best for you You should be able to tell people making decisions that affect you what you think \u2013 and they should listen and think about what you have said You have the right to privacy, freedom to believe what you want and freedom of expression, although only as long as you don\u2019t make it difficult for someone else to have their rights You should be protected from violence and abuse", "Wales takes its responsibility to make sure all children and young people have their rights under the UNCRC very seriously. From the way schools are run \u2013 so that children and young people are involved through School Councils \u2013 to making sure that children and young people are not unfairly excluded from school \u2013 and protecting children and young people from being treated unfairly while they are at school \u2013 your rights are protected. This doesn\u2019t mean things will always go how you want them to at school \u2013 but it means that you will always be treated with respect.", "In this section of our website, you can find out about:-", "Going to school What happens if you get your education somewhere other than school Being in Trouble at school School uniform Getting involved in how your school is run What you can do if you think you are being treated unfairly at school The rules about speaking Welsh or English at school What you can do if school isn\u2019t meeting your needs What your options are after school"], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/at-school/going-to-school/": ["In Wales, you have to be in education between the ages of 5 and 16 \u2013 although you can stay in school for longer \u2013 until you are 18 - if you want Most children in Wales go to school, but you don\u2019t have to go to school as long as you are getting an education Your parents have to choose where they would like you to go to school, or whether to make arrangements for you to be educated somewhere else or to teach you themselves", "Wherever you live in Wales, you can go to school between the ages of 5 and 16. Your parents have to decide which school you should go to. As you get older, you might have an opinion about which school you should go to, so you can talk to your parents or the people responsible for making these sorts of decisions, about what you want. You should be able to go and visit the schools in your area so you and your parents can make a proper decision about which school will be right for you.", "You\u2019re learning all the time, whether you\u2019re in school or not, but school is where most children and young people in Wales receive a big part of their education. If your parents have chosen a school for you and you are registered there, they should make sure you go to school regularly. As you get older, and have more independence, you might not want to go to school, but until you are 16, your parents have to make sure that you go to school. If you don\u2019t turn up to school, you may end up being excluded from school and arrangements may be made for you to learn somewhere else.", "Sometimes, school isn\u2019t the right place for you to learn, or you can\u2019t go to school, so the Local Authority will be able to talk to you about other places you can go to get your education. Some parents do choose to educate their children at home, and they are allowed to do this provided you are getting an education. You can find out more about being educated at home or somewhere else, here.", "You can leave school on the last Friday in June in the school year when you will turn 16. As long as you will be 16 before the end of the summer holidays in that year, you can leave school.", "In Wales, there is no requirement to stay in school once you are 16, but equally, you can stay in education if you want to. You might want to carry on in school until you are 18, especially if you want to go on to university. You should be able to stay in school until you\u2019re 18. Alternatively, you can leave school and continue your education at a Sixth Form College.", "Depending on where you live In Wales, you may have a choice whether to go to a Welsh Medium school, and English medium school, or a bilingual school. More and more schools are teaching through Welsh, and you will learn Welsh whichever kind of school you go to. Find out more about Welsh of English in school here.", "There may be schools in your area which are \u2018faith\u2019 schools. \u2018Faith\u2019 schools will have a particular religious character \u2013 it could be Roman Catholic, Jewish, Muslim or another faith.", "As well as state schools, which are the schools funded and organised by the local authority, there are independent schools. You usually have to pay to go to an independent school.", "You should have a voice in any decision that affects you \u2013 and the school you go to is one of the biggest decisions that affect most children. If you are really unhappy with the decision of your parents, and you have tried to talk to them, you might be able to talk to someone at school.", "If there are things at school that are making you unhappy, like bullying by other pupils or by a teacher, you should try and talk to someone about it so that things can be done to help. Decisions made about you should always be based on what\u2019s best for you \u2013 and sometimes this might mean moving school.", "If you don\u2019t go to the school where you are registered, you can end up getting into trouble. You can find out more about what can happen if you don\u2019t go to the school where you are registered here.", "If you\u2018re registered at a school you\u2019re supposed to go every day unless there\u2019s a good reason why not. If you are sick, you can\u2019t go to school. You might have to go to a hospital appointment, or there might be another reason why you can\u2019t go to school. You will need to tell the school what is happening, or else the absence will be \u2018unauthorised\u2019.", "If the reason why you can\u2019t go to school is likely to last for some time \u2013 for example\u00a0 if you have an illness that is going to last for a long time, or if you have been excluded then other arrangements will be made for you to have your education.", "In Wales, if you go to a \u2018maintained school\u2019, your parents or carer can ask your school to allow you to have up to 10 days off school to go on holiday. If the head teacher agrees, you will be able to go on holiday instead of going to school, and the time off will be authorised by school. The head teacher has to think about all the factors \u2013 including when the holiday will be, how long you are going for, and what you will be going to do, what impact it might have on your learning, your family circumstances and your parents or carers\u2019 wishes, and what your attendance is like at school generally.", "Sometimes, depending on the situation, you may be allowed longer than 10 days.", "If there aren\u2019t enough places for all the children who want to go to a particular school, this is called \u2018oversubscription\u2019. There will be a policy in place which says which children will be offered places if this happens. The policy has to be fair. You can\u2019t be refused a place at a Welsh-Medium school because you don\u2019t speak Welsh. The school can\u2019t take into account your behaviour (unless you have already been excluded from 2 or more schools in the past), or any special educational needs you might have. The school can\u2019t make decisions about whether you get a place or not based on your parents, or based on the behaviour of your brother or sister at the school.", "If there are enough places for everyone who has applied, then every child should get a place. If there are not enough places, a school can\u2019t decide that you can\u2019t go there because you have a disability, or because of your religion, unless the school is a \u2018faith\u2019 school, or because you have been permanently excluded from another school.", "If there aren\u2019t enough places, the school will have an oversubscription policy which explains who will get the places that are available. The policy has to be applied to every child who wants a place. Children who are \u2018looked after\u2019 or have been looked after in the past will take priority. Other factors which can be taken into account include:", "The school must explain its oversubscription policy in a way that is easy to understand.", "If you have a brother or a sister already at the school If you have a twin, or are one of triplets etc If you have a medical need which makes it more important for you to go to a particular school \u2013 perhaps because it is closer to hospital How far away from the school you live If a school is based on a particular faith or religion, it will be allowed to give priority to children from the same faith or religion", "Schools are allowed to give out places at sixth form (years 12 and 13) based on \u2018ability\u2019. They may do this by saying that you have to get a minimum number of GCSEs achieved at a particular grade e.g. 5 GCSEs at grade C or higher. Even if you don\u2019t have to get a minimum number of GCSEs to go to Sixth Form, this can be used by the school if too many people apply for a place in Sixth Form.", "If you aren\u2019t given a place at the primary school or secondary school you want to go to, your parents can appeal against that decision.", "If you don\u2019t get a place in the Sixth Form you would like to go to, you can appeal yourself, as well as your parents.", "You will be sent details of how to appeal by your Local Authority when they send you the decision about which school you can go to. Your appeal will be heard by an Independent Appeal Panel. The people who will decide your appeal won\u2019t be employed by the school or the Local Authority. You can only appeal once in any school year.", "If you have a statement of Special Educational Needs, your appeal about where you should go to school will be looked at by the Special Educational Needs Tribunal in Wales.", "There\u2019s nothing to stop you and your parents applying to change school. You might have been having trouble with bullying in the school you started in, or you might move house and want to go to a school that is closer to your new home. This might also happen if you have been permanently excluded from one school, or if you can\u2019t live with your parents anymore and go somewhere else to live \u2013 perhaps with another relative or with foster parents.", "Even if you\u2019re not sure how long you will be staying somewhere, you can still go to school there \u2013 and as long as there is space in the school that you want to go to, you should be able to register there.", "You can get in touch with the Local Authority or get in touch with the school itself to find out more about the school and to find out how to apply. As long as there is enough space for you to join the school, you should be able to go there.", "In Wales, all children have the right to education. It doesn\u2019t matter where you have come from. If you are aged between 5 and 16, you have to go to school in Wales. If you want to stay in school and study for A levels or another qualification this should be possible whatever your immigration status, until you are 18."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/at-school/not-at-school/": ["As a child or young person under the age of 18, you have the right to education, but you don\u2019t have to go to school to get an education Your parents can decide to educate you at home, and there may be other reasons why you don\u2019t go to school, and are educated somewhere else When any of these decisions are being made, the adults involved should take account of your views, and make decisions that are in your best interests", "In Wales, every child should be in education between the ages of 5 and 16, but you don\u2019t have to be educated at school. Some children are educated at home by their parents. Some children are educated in Pupil Referral Units because they find it difficult to learn in a \u2018school\u2019 environment. If you are ill on a long term basis, you might be educated in hospital, and if you have been in trouble with the police and are in youth custody, you should be educated there. As long as you are getting an education that develops your personality and your talents, your mental and physical abilities, teaches you about being part of society and encourages you to respect your own culture and other peoples\u2019 cultures, that\u2019s fine.", "It\u2019s a duty of your local authority to make sure children and young people can receive a suitable education even if they aren\u2019t at school. So if there\u2019s a reason why you can\u2019t go to school \u2013 because you\u2019re ill, or because you\u2019ve been excluded from school, you will still receive an education. This could be in a Pupil Referral Unit which is a kind of school set up by the LEA specifically for children and young people who can\u2019t go to \u2018mainstream\u2019 school.  You can be educated at home if that\u2019s what your parents think is best for you.  If you can\u2019t go to school because of a medical condition or illness, you may be able to access education at hospital. You can find out more about this here.", "If you have been in trouble with the police and ended up in a Secure Children\u2019s Home, a Secure Training Centre or a Youth Offenders Institution, you still have the right to an education. At least some of your day should be set aside for education so you can continue to learn.", "If your parents, or the people with parental responsibility for you, decide that it will be better for you to be educated at home, they can choose to do this. It\u2019s called \u2018Elective Home Education\u2019.\u00a0 Your parents can only choose to educate you at home if they can provide you with an efficient and suitable, full time education. Most parents who choose to home educate will be very focused on making sure you get the right education for you. Being educated at home can give some children and young people freedom to learn in ways that suit them better than school.", "If your parents decide to home educate you, they must consider what is in your best interests, rather than their own.", "If you aren\u2019t at school and you\u2019d like to go, it will depend on the reason you are not at school. If you are being home educated, you will need to discuss this with your parents (or carers) and try and come to an agreement with them. Your parents are the main decision maker when it comes to your education. As long as they are doing a good job of your education, it is unlikely that anyone from the local authority will step in and make you go to school.  If you have to spend a lot of time in hospital, it may be that you keep your connection with school but you can use the teaching opportunities in hospital to keep up with your school work when you are feeling well enough. If there are times when you feel able to do so, you should be able to go back to your school. You can find out more about how you can keep up with your education if you need medical care here.", "Sometimes you might need support in a particular area, which your mainstream school can\u2019t provide. You might spend some time at a special school or a Pupil Referral Unit, where teachers are better qualified to give you the help you need but spend other times at school."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/at-school/not-meeting-my-needs/": ["Your views should be taken into account when decisions about the right kind of education for you are being made \u2013 and decisions should always be based on what is best for you If you live with a condition or a disability that makes it hard for you to learn, or which makes it harder for you to participate in school life, your education should take account of any extra help and support you might need Lots of children and young people can get the right sort of education for them at a mainstream school \u2013 and if not, there are special schools to support children with complicated needs", "Your right to education doesn\u2019t change because you find it harder to learn than other children or young people. Every child learns differently, and every child progresses at different rates, so schools and teachers need to take account of this. For some children and young people, it is harder for them to get the right sort of education.", "You might have special educational needs which means that you need extra support to help them learn effectively. This could mean that you also have a disability. You might have no problems learning, but you might still have a disability which makes it harder for you to participate fully in school life. If you have special educational needs and/or a disability, your school needs to help you so that you don\u2019t face barriers at school.", "Special Educational Needs is the term that\u2019s used to describe it when someone has difficulties learning but it can mean a lot of different things, including having difficulties with:", "You might have some kind of sensory or physical needs which may affect you in school.", "It\u2019s important to remember that every child is different so just because you find some things difficult, or you think you aren\u2019t progressing in the same way as some of your friends, it won\u2019t necessarily mean that you have a special educational need.", "some or all of the work you have to do in school reading, writing, number work or understanding information expressing yourself or understanding what others are saying making friends or relating to adults behaving properly in school organising yourself", "You might be born with a particular condition which automatically means you might find learning more difficult. Sometimes, though, it\u2019s not as easy to spot if you will need a bit more support until you get to playgroup or school. You might have worked out a way to cope with some of the challenges you face too, but this doesn\u2019t mean you shouldn\u2019t get help and support.", "Your parents might be worried about how you are getting on at school, or a teacher or classroom assistant might spot something that\u2019s different. If you are feeling upset or worried about how things are going at school, you should talk to your parents about it, and they should take it up with your school. If you can\u2019t talk to your parents, try and talk to your teacher or another adult at school who you trust.", "There is a document called the SEN Code of Practice for Wales which sets out what will happen to make sure your needs are met. This Code of Practice includes how all the people involved in this process should behave. You may have to talk to different people while they work out what your needs are and how you should be supported. You will know some of these people from school, but there may be people from outside school involved too. Sometimes you will be with your parents when you talk to these people, but sometimes, people will want to talk to you on your own.", "Your views should be listened to and taken into account (as well as the views of your parents) while decisions are being made about how your needs will be supported.", "Once they have spoken to everyone, your school teachers and Special Educational Needs Co-Ordinator for the school should create an individual education plan to support you so that you can get all the help you need in school.", "This is another way of making sure you are getting the support you need to learn. If you have lots of different needs, or if you aren\u2019t making the progress that would be expected under your Independent Education Plan, you may be assessed for a Statement of Special Needs. This is a document that will be prepared by the Local Education Authority which looks at all your needs and how to meet them.", "After the assessment, the Local Education Authority might decide that you don\u2019t need a Statement of Special Needs. If this happens, the Local Education Authority should write down anything useful that it has learned from the assessments and send it to your school and your parents. This is called a Note in Lieu.", "A Statement of Special Needs is a legal document (a Note in Lieu isn\u2019t). It will describe all your needs and all the additional help that you need.", "Part of the Statement will include details of the school you should go to so that your needs are met. This could be a school you already go to, or it might be a different school that your parents think will be better for you. The LEA has to agree with your parents\u2019 choice of school, unless the choice they have made isn\u2019t suitable for you, or would end up having an impact on other children at that school, or there is a better way to meet your needs.", "If you have a statement of Special Educational Needs which names a school where you should go, that school has to give you a place.", "If you don\u2019t have a statement of Special Educational Needs, or you have a statement but it doesn\u2019t name a particular school, you can apply to a school under the normal admissions policy of that school. You shouldn\u2019t be treated any differently and you shouldn\u2019t be refused a place at that school because the school doesn\u2019t think it can meet your needs.", "You can appeal directly to the Special Educational Needs Tribunal Wales if you disagree with a decision that has been made about you. You will have to do this in a written application form, so you might need to get someone to help you. You can have a \u2018case friend\u2019 to help you if you want to appeal yourself.", "Your parents can also appeal about a decision that has been made about your special educational needs and your education. They can appeal about a decision even if you have appealed in your own right.", "Yes. Because you have the right to make an appeal to the Special Educational Needs Tribunal Wales yourself, you should be told by your Local Education Authority when you have this right.", "Yes. You can appeal a decision even if your parents have too. You may have different reasons for your appeal, or you might want a different decision. Your parents can help you with your appeal even if they have made their own appeal.", "The reason (or reasons) why you have Special Educational Needs might also be a \u2018disability\u2019. There is a legal definition of \u2018disability\u2019 which includes things that affect your body and your mind which makes it extra hard for you to get involved with normal activities. Your school and your Local Education Authority have to make sure you aren\u2019t treated unfairly because of a disability, unless there is a good reason for it. You can find out more about this in our section about being treated unfairly at school.", "Having a disability doesn\u2019t mean you have special educational needs. But you might have other needs that your school should take into account so that you can participate in school life and have a full education. You might find it difficult to walk, or you might use a hearing aid. You might have a condition like epilepsy or cancer. If you have a disability, you shouldn\u2019t be treated unfairly at school because of it. Your school also has to make \u2018reasonable adjustments\u2019 to make sure it\u2019s not making it difficult for you to go to school and receive your education.", "What is a reasonable adjustment will depend on your disability and how it affects you. It might be as straightforward as letting you use a particular piece of equipment to help you learn the same as everyone else. Sometimes, getting into a school building may be a problem for you \u2013 so an access ramp might make it easier for you if you are a wheel chair user, or you might need to lift so that you can get up to different levels in school. Your school doesn\u2019t have to do everything \u2013 but it must do what is reasonable. It might not be reasonable to do something if it will cost a lot of money and only improve things a small amount for you.", "Your school should think about how to make it accessible for you before you come to school and come across problems. It ought to consider the sorts of things that might be difficult for disabled pupils and work out how to tackle them. Even though your school has to try and work out in advance what would help you, it may not have thought of everything, If your school hasn\u2019t done something that would help you, you can talk to them about it \u2013 they may not have realised how it would help you.", "Schools are not allowed to treat you unfairly because of any disability you might be living with. The school can\u2019t discriminate against you at the admissions stage, and should anticipate how it could make \u2018reasonable adjustments\u2019 to make the school easier for you to access and get around.", "If your school hasn\u2019t helped you or you have been treated unfairly because of your disability \u2013 even if these aren\u2019t Special Educational Needs - you can make a claim to the Special Educational Needs Tribunal Wales. Read more on our page about being treated unfairly at school."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/at-school/how-school-is-run/": ["Children and young people in Wales have a voice in decisions that affect them There are lots of opportunities for you to be involved in decision making about how your school is run Most schools in Wales have to have a School Council to represent the views of the pupils in decision making at school", "You spend a lot of time at school, so it\u2019s right that your opinions about what happens there. Your parents or the people responsible for you may have chosen the school you go to \u2013 but you can have a say in how your school is run. The Welsh Government has recognised the importance of children and young people having a real voice in decision making at school, which is why every school must have a School Council.", "Every \u2018maintained school\u2019 in Wales (apart from nursery schools and infant schools) should have a School Council. The head teacher and the school governors must listen to anything the School Council raises with them, and take the School Council\u2019s views into account in decision making. The head and the governors must let the School Council know what it will do about anything that has been raised by the School Council, or about the decision that has been made.", "The School Council should have at least one pupil from each year group in the school, from year 3 and above. The best way to choose the people who make up the School Council is by secret elections in school, so that the pupils choose which pupils will represent them. You should be able to vote for the candidates in your year group. If some of the pupils at your school have special educational needs, they should be represented on the School Council too.", "In most schools, the number of pupils would make it impractical for every pupil to sit on the School Council, but it could happen. At least one pupil from each year group in the school, from year 3 upwards, should be included on the School Council. If only some pupils sit on the School Council, every pupil should be able to have a secret vote for the School Council representatives for their year group.", "In secondary schools (for children aged 11-18), the School Council should be allowed to nominate 2 pupils from years 11-13 to be Associate Pupil Governors. This means that they will sit on the school\u2019s governing body and be involved in decision making at that level. The head teacher and the governing body have to accept the pupils nominated by the School Council unless there is a specific reason why those pupils shouldn\u2019t be a Pupil Governor.", "There are some decisions and discussions that the Pupil Governors can\u2019t be involved in. This includes discussions about members of staff and also about individual pupils.", "The School Council is there for you to make your voice heard. If you aren\u2019t elected to the School Council, you should be able to tell a member of the School Council what your issue or question is and they should be able to discuss it at the School Council meeting, and talk to the head teacher about it on your behalf. You should find out what happens.", "Schools in Wales have other opportunities for pupils to get involved and participate in what goes on in school. Eco Schools and the Young Ambassadors programmes are just two of the ways you can be involved and influence how your school is run. You may also be able to get involved running clubs for other pupils. By participating and taking an active part in school life, you are more likely to be able to make your voice heard.", "The rules about School Councils work differently for community special schools and foundation special schools. There should still be a School Council though.", "Only \u2018maintained schools\u2019 in Wales have to have a School Council. These are the schools that are run by the Local Authorities \u2013 sometimes called \u2018state\u2019 schools or comprehensives. If you go to an independent school (where your parents or someone else must pay fees for you to go) there doesn\u2019t have to be a School Council \u2013 but you may find that there is a School Council or some other way of participating in school life."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/at-school/welsh-or-english/": ["You have the right to an education which encourages you to respect your culture \u2013 and the culture of others. You also have the right to learn and use the language of your family The Local Authority where you live has to make sure that the schools and education in your area have to take account of how parents want their children to be educated Depending on where in Wales you live, you may have the choice whether to learn in Welsh, in English or bilingually", "Welsh is an official language in Wales, alongside English. The Local Authorities in Wales, which are responsible for most of the schools in Wales, have to have a \u2018Welsh in Education\u2019 plan to make sure children and young people in Wales can learn through Welsh, and to make sure Welsh is taught to a high standard.", "There are different types of school in Wales depending on how much of the teaching is done in Welsh. They include \u2018Welsh Medium\u2019 where Welsh is the \u2018day to day language of the school, and most of the teaching is in Welsh, to \u2018English Medium\u2019 where everything is taught in English with Welsh being taught as a second language. Your choice of school will depend on what is available in your area.", "All children in Wales have to learn Welsh up until they are 16. This means that you will have to do Welsh at GCSE, either as a first language or as a second language. You will also be taught English and will have to do English GCSE. Even if you are in an English-medium school, you will still learn Welsh.", "If more than half the children and young people in your area are taught in English, your Local Authority has ask people in that area if they would like their children to be taught in Welsh. Depending on the replies it gets, the Local Authority must do things to make Welsh-medium education more available. This could include changing your school to Welsh medium.", "Every school is responsible for setting out what will happen if a pupil doesn\u2019t behave in a way that is expected. If you go to a Welsh medium school, you may be encouraged \u2013 or expected to speak Welsh all the time you are in school, not just in lessons. This might be difficult if you have only just started learning Welsh, or if you are struggling to learn Welsh, so you should be helped and supported to learn Welsh so you can participate in school life. If you choose to ignore school standards or rules that expect you to speak Welsh all the time, your school might take some action to encourage you to speak Welsh. This may be as simple as reminding you that the school is \u2018Welsh medium\u2019 which means the day to day language, inside and outside the classroom, is Welsh.", "Any action your school did take would have to be reasonable, respect your rights and your dignity and take account of your situation. This should include how long you have been learning Welsh and anything that might make it difficult for you to speak Welsh. Your school also needs to remember that you have the right to use the language of your family.", "Your education should encourage you to respect your own culture and other cultures. Welsh is one of the official languages of Wales and learning and speaking Welsh at school is a great opportunity to find out more about Welsh culture. Your school may have an expectation that you will speak Welsh at all times in school, apart from when you are learning English, so if you don\u2019t want to speak Welsh at school, you may need to talk to your parents about whether this is the right school for you.", "Remember that you will have to learn Welsh at every \u2018state\u2019 school in Wales, whether you do so as a \u2018first\u2019 language or a \u2018second\u2019 language.", "If you don\u2019t speak Welsh, you will get extra support from the school and from the Local Authority to help you learn. Each Local Authority will have different options in place to help you learn Welsh."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/at-school/treated-unfairly/": ["School should be a good place to be \u2013 and your rights and your dignity should always be respected, even if you haven\u2019t followed the school rules You should be able to complain if something is worrying you or upsetting you at school In some cases, you may be able to take your complaint further if your school doesn\u2019t deal with the problem or concern properly", "If there is something at school that affects every pupil. Or a group of pupils, that you think is unfair, you could raise it with your School Council. It might be something about the amount of homework you are getting, or a new rule that has been introduced. You might also want to ask the School Council to discuss something that you think should be done at school. The School Council can\u2019t deal with individual matters, though. If it\u2019s something very specific to you, you will need to deal with it in a different way.", "Being bullied is a terrible experience for anyone. You may be scared to talk to anyone about what is happening to you, but the sooner you tell someone, the quicker it can be sorted out.", "If you don\u2019t want to speak to anyone at school straightaway, and you can\u2019t talk to your parents, you can get in touch with an organisation that provides advice and support by phone or online \u2013 and you don\u2019t have to tell them who you are. Sometimes, just talking to someone else can help.", "Every secondary school will have an independent counselling service on site. Although it\u2019s at school, it has to be independent, which means it isn\u2019t linked to the school. Just talking to the counsellor may help you work out what you want to do about the bullying.", "Depending on how you are being bullied, the people bullying you may also be breaking the law. This could include if the person (or people) bullying you is hurting you, or the bullying relates to something like your race or your gender. Your school may get in touch with the police, or you or your parents may want to do this if the behaviour is continuing and nothing seems to be changing.", "It isn\u2019t just children who bully other children. There is a chance that you might find yourself being bullied by a teacher. Teachers have to make sure that the classroom has the right atmosphere for learning, but they need to make sure that any action they take to keep school discipline respects your dignity and your rights.", "If you think a teacher is treating you unfairly, you might be able to sort things out by talking to the teacher, or perhaps your form teacher or tutor, the head of year, or the head teacher. One of your parents might be able to help you. If you can\u2019t get things sorted out, you can use your school complaints procedure to try and sort things out. Every school should have a complaints procedure.", "Your school isn\u2019t allowed to treat you unfairly because of a disability that you have. \u2018Disability\u2019 has a specific meaning in law. It means having a \u201cphysical or mental impairment which has a substantial and long-term adverse effect on your ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities\u201d.", "A \u2018physical impairment\u2019 is something which affects your body. It could be something like epilepsy or cancer, or cerebral palsy. You might have a physical impairment if you can\u2019t see or hear properly, or can\u2019t use your arms or legs.", "A \u2018mental impairment\u2019 could be something like Autism or learning difficulties, or emotional or behavioural difficulties.", "Sometimes, the school might make a decision which is unfair but the school will be able to justify it. An example would be if you are a wheelchair user and you are told you can\u2019t go on a school trip because it wouldn\u2019t be safe. If the school has carried out a health & safety assessment which says that it wouldn\u2019t be safe to take you, that decision might be justified. If the school hasn\u2019t done any kind of assessment and has just assumed it wouldn\u2019t be safe for you to go on the trip, it would be harder to justify that decision.", "You should always try and solve any issues like this by talking to your teacher or to someone else at school. If they can\u2019t help you, you can use the school complaints policy, and you could make a claim to the Special Educational Needs Tribunal Wales if the problems continue.", "You don\u2019t have to be disabled yourself to suffer from disability discrimination. You might be treated unfairly because one of your friends is disabled. Perhaps other people bully you because of your friendship. This would be disability discrimination. You might also find that you are treated unfairly at school because someone thinks you have a disability \u2013 even if you don\u2019t. If you are having this kind of problem, your school should resolve it. If they don\u2019t again, you may be able to bring a claim to the Special Educational Needs Tribunal Wales.", "Teachers are allowed to deal with your behaviour if you have broken a school rule or code of conduct. When they do this, they have to act reasonably, and respect your rights and your dignity. Your teachers should never be violent towards you or abuse you. Teachers and other school staff can use what is called \u2018reasonable force\u2019 to stop you from hurting yourself or others, from damaging property or disrupting the school. If you think that you have been treated unfairly for breaking a school rule or because of your behaviour, you can complain to the school. If you\u2019ve been hurt by a teacher, you might want to report it to the police who can investigate what happened. You can find out more about what happens if you\u2019re in trouble at school here.", "If you regularly break your school\u2019s behaviour policy, or do something very serious such as harm another pupil or a teacher, your school might consider excluding you. You can be excluded for half a day, a day, a few days or for longer. In serious cases you might be permanently excluded from school. Your school has to consider all possible other options before excluding you. It also has to follow a procedure before excluding you, including investigating what has happened and talking to you about it. If you are excluded, you have the right to appeal, so if you have been treated unfairly, you should do this.", "Your school has to make sure it doesn\u2019t treat you unfairly when it excludes you for something like your race or your gender or a disability."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/at-school/in-trouble-at-school/": ["Even if you are in trouble at school, you still have your \u2018children\u2019s rights\u2019 Your school can put consequences in place for you if you break the rules, but it still has to respect you You should still get your education, even if you have broken the school rules", "Wherever you are educated, there will be rules, or some kind of behaviour charter that you\u2019re expected to follow. Your school may ask the pupils what they think of the rules, or they may not. However the \u2018rules\u2019 at your school or pupil referral unit are made, and whether they are called \u2018rules\u2019 or a \u2018behaviour charter\u2019 or something else, there will be consequences in place for pupils who decide not to follow them. This section of the website looks at your rights if you break the rules, and what could happen to you.", "Wherever you are educated there will be rules about how you are expected to behave. Although each school might have a different set of rules, they usually cover things like wearing school uniform, what time you have to be at school, doing homework, and your behaviour in school. This could include things like not running in corridors, and how you talk to teachers.", "You have to be able to know what the school rules are so that you don\u2019t break them accidentally! Your school will have school rules that might also be called a Behaviour Charter or a Code of Conduct. There might also be a behaviour management policy which will set out more detail about how the school rules will work. You should be able to find out what these rules are, so they might be on the school website, and in a contact book. Your head teacher has to make sure the rules are written down, and that everyone at school knows about them.", "Every school will have a different approach to what happens when someone breaks the school rules or behaviour policy, so you will need to find out what happens at your school. Many schools have a \u2018warning\u2019 system so you will know if your behaviour is likely to get you into trouble if you carry on. For more serious problems, if you hurt someone or damage property, there may be consequences straight away. Your school can decide on what happen to pupils who don\u2019t follow the school rules, as long as they do this properly.", "Although every school will have its own approach to what happens if you don\u2019t behave in the way school expects, every school has the power to tell you that you can\u2019t come to school. This could be for a few days, or for longer. In the most serious case, you might even be permanently excluded from a school.", "Once you are 11, you will be told by your school if you are going to be excluded, and about your right to appeal against that decision. Your parents or carer will be told as well.", "Being excluded from school is a serious thing, and it is usually a \u2018last resort\u2019 for a school. Sometimes, if what you have done is also breaking the law, the school might exclude you even if it is the first time you have been in trouble at school.", "If you go to a Pupil Referral Unit, you can be excluded from there too.", "Before your school decides whether to exclude you it will need to investigate what has happened. This is an important decision which will affect you, so your school should talk to you about what happened. They should find out your side of the story, and it\u2019s important that you tell them everything about what happened \u2013 especially if something happened to make you behave like you did. This could include being bullied by another pupil. The school also has to make sure it checks its own rules, and thinks about what alternatives there are to exclusion. The school needs to think about what is in your best interests.", "Your school can decide how long to exclude you for. It could be for a morning, a lunchtime, or an afternoon. It could be for a few days, or it could be permanently. Your school does have to fix the amount of time you will be excluded for \u2013 e.g. \u20182 days\u2019. Unless you are permanently excluded from the school, you can\u2019t be excluded from school for more than 45 days in any school year. This applies if you go to a new school or to a Pupil Referral Unit during the school year \u2013 the new school has to take account of any exclusions that have already happened that year at your old school.", "Just because you have been excluded doesn\u2019t mean your education stops. Your school should carry on setting work for you and marking it, until you return to school, unless you have been excluded for a day or less. Even if you have been permanently excluded, your school should carry on giving you work and marking it until the appeals process has finished or you or your parents or carers say that you aren\u2019t going to appeal.", "No. You still have the right to education, so even if you are permanently excluded from one school, you can go to a different school, or you may go to a Pupil Referral Unit for a while. Other schools can\u2019t stop you from going just because you have been permanently excluded from another school.", "No! If your school thinks your behaviour has been so bad that you shouldn\u2019t come to that school, they need to follow the proper procedure to exclude you. Your school shouldn\u2019t ask your parents or carer to keep you at home. Apart from anything else, this doesn\u2019t give you the opportunity to put your side of the story, and it could make it difficult for you to carry on getting your education.", "This is an exclusion, so there should be an investigation, and it should be recorded as an exclusion. You might be sent home for a specific reason \u2013 for example, if you have come to school without the proper school uniform, you might be sent home to change. This might not be an exclusion if you are told to come straight back to school.", "Your school can\u2019t use exclusion as a way to keep you safe \u2013 for example if you are being bullied. The school needs to deal with the bullying, and not avoid the problem by making you stay away from school.", "The way your school is managed and especially how you are treated at school, should respect your rights and dignity. Your teachers are allowed to deal with your behaviour if it doesn\u2019t match up to the rules of the school. When they do this, they have to act \u2018reasonably\u2019. This means that what happens to you should match your behaviour. If you\u2019ve done something silly you should only get a small punishment. If you have done something more serious or you are continually breaking rules, the consequences might be more serious. The teacher also has to think about whether there are any reasons why you might have behaved in the way you have done, including your age, and whether you are living with a disability or have other needs.", "If you\u2019re not at school but still doing something related to school, even where no teacher is there in charge, a teacher can still deal with your behaviour. This could include your behaviour on a school bus travelling to or from school. If you\u2019re on a school trip, or playing sport for your school or doing something else \u2018with school\u2019 the school rules will still apply.", "You have the right to be protected from violence or abuse by anyone who looks after you. Your teachers should never use violence against you or abuse you. If your behaviour means that you will be breaking the law (or would be breaking the law if you were old enough), or that property might get damaged, or it\u2019s seriously disrupting school, your teachers can use what is called \u2018reasonable force\u2019 to try and stop this happening. This means that a teacher might be allowed to hold you back to stop others being hurt or upset.", "In most cases, the teacher should warn you what\u2019s about to happen before he or she steps in to use force to stop whatever is happening. As soon as the situation has passed, the teacher should stop.", "Your teachers are not allowed to hit or smack you, and they cannot use force to punish you. They can only use force to stop what is happening. If you did get hurt while the teacher was using force to stop something else happening, this might be allowed.", "It\u2019s a criminal offence to take a knife into school, so you would be breaking the law if you did that. School staff have the right to search you, and your possessions, to see if you have a knife, even if you don\u2019t agree to being searched. The school must have a reason to think you might have a knife with you before it can search you.", "There are rules about how a teacher or other member of school staff can search you and what happens to your property if a knife or anything else that might be connected to breaking the law. You should only be searched by someone who is the same gender as you, and there should be another teacher or member of staff of the same sex with you. If the school is going to search your possessions, you have to be there, as well as another member of staff.", "Your school might also decide to use some kind of screening for all pupils. This could be a walk through arch, or using a hand-held \u2018wand\u2019 to scan you. Your school might scan you even if it doesn\u2019t have a reason to think you might have a knife. Your school should only do this if it is generally worried about pupils bringing knives or other weapons into school, and they should think about whether they need to screen all pupils all the time. School will be doing this to try and keep school safe and to protect everyone from violence at school \u2013 but you also have the right to privacy, so the school has to balance these two things.", "If something has happened and you are angry and need to calm down, your teacher might decide that it\u2019s appropriate for you to be taken to a quiet room.", "You should never be locked in a room on your own. If a teacher thinks that locking you in a room is necessary in an emergency while he or she sorts something out, you shouldn\u2019t be left on your own, and you should only be locked in for a short time in an emergency. You should never be locked in a room on your own as a punishment.", "If your school has clear rules about using mobiles at school which includes confiscation if you don\u2019t follow the rules, then if you don\u2019t respect this, your school may ask you to hand over your phone. If the school is going to do this, it needs to think carefully about what the consequences might be, and make sure it takes everything into account before taking away your phone. If taking your phone away for longer than the school day might make you vulnerable or put you at risk in some way, it probably won\u2019t be reasonable for the school to do this.", "Provided your phone has been confiscated by a teacher following a school behaviour policy or rule, the school or the teacher doesn\u2019t have to do anything if your phone is damaged or lost while it has been confiscated.", "Most of the time, breaking a school rule won\u2019t mean getting in trouble with the police. The school will have its own consequences for things like not wearing the right kind of school uniform, not turning up on time or not doing homework. The police wouldn\u2019t be involved in anything like that.", "If you hurt someone in school, or are involved in serious bullying, or if you steal something, then the police might get involved. If you have broken a law as well as a school rule, the school will have its own way of dealing with it, but they may also get the police involved. Even if the school don\u2019t tell the police what has happened, someone else might. For example, if you hurt someone else at school, they might tell the police what has happened. You can find out more about being in trouble with the police here."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/at-school/uniform/": ["Your school decides whether to have a school uniform or not Pupils need to be involved in any changes to the school uniform Your school must be careful that the uniform it chooses is appropriate for all pupils at the school", "Your school doesn\u2019t have to have a school uniform, but most schools do. If there is a school uniform, it will probably be a school rule that you wear the uniform when you are at school, or if you represent the school in something like sport or music.\u00a0 Your school has to be careful that it chooses a uniform that is appropriate for all pupils at the school, and should talk to pupils before introducing a school uniform or making changes to the uniform that you already wear.", "There is no law that says that your school has to have school uniform but lots of schools choose to have one. It helps everyone at one school feel part of one community. If everyone is wearing the same uniform there is less pressure on you to be wearing the \u2018right\u2019 kind of clothes, and can stop bullying that might happen over the kind of clothes you wear. Some schools that don\u2019t have a school uniform may still have a \u2018dress code\u2019 which makes general rules about the kinds of clothes you can (or can\u2019t) wear at school.", "If your school (or the school you will be going to) has a school uniform, it should have a written document, called a \u2018school uniform policy\u2019 with all the details of the uniform included. Some schools will include the uniform policy in the prospectus with other details about the school, the uniform policy might be on the school website or included in the \u2018home/school agreement\u2019.", "If your school has chosen to have a school uniform, it will probably be a school rule that you must wear the uniform to come to school. The school may want to discipline you if you don\u2019t wear the correct uniform, but they should check first that there isn\u2019t a good reason why you aren\u2019t wearing the uniform. If you got your uniform dirty and it hasn\u2019t been washed, or if you have lost something and haven\u2019t been able to replace it, it might not be right for the school to punish you.", "Your school has to make sure that the uniform is appropriate for all pupils. Sometimes the uniform might not be appropriate, for example if you have been in an accident and broken your arm or leg. You might have an ongoing condition that makes it hard for you to wear some kinds of clothes. Sometimes, you might want to wear something because of your religion that isn\u2019t included in school uniform. If you\u2019ve got a reason like this which makes it difficult to wear school uniform, you need to discuss this with the school, because it could be \u2018discrimination\u2019 against you \u2013 and the school may need to change its uniform policy.", "If your school doesn\u2019t have a uniform, and is thinking of introducing one, or has a uniform and is going to change it, the school should talk to pupils (as well as parents and teachers) about this. If your school is planning changes to school uniform, it might involve the School Council in its discussions. Your school doesn\u2019t have to do what you want, but it must take your views into account.", "The school uniform shouldn\u2019t be so expensive that it makes it difficult for you to have the right uniform. Wales has a school uniform grant which will help some families that might find it difficult to buy uniform for secondary school. You will need to find out more from your local authority. If you don\u2019t know which is your local authority, you can find out online.", "Just because you don\u2019t like wearing the school uniform isn\u2019t enough of a reason not to wear it. But if you have a specific reason why you can\u2019t wear something that is part of the school uniform, or if you want to wear something that isn\u2019t part of the uniform, your school may have to think carefully about the school uniform. Your school might need to let you wear something that isn\u2019t quite part of the uniform, otherwise it could be breaking the law.", "Some examples:", "You and your parents, or the people looking after you, should talk to your school to discuss the reasons why you don\u2019t want to wear the school uniform. In most cases, you should be able to work out an agreement with the school about what you can wear so that everyone is happy. If not, and you feel that the school isn\u2019t listening to you, you may decide to take things further.", "Some people with Autistic Spectrum Disorders find some kinds of clothes difficult to wear Some religions require followers to wear particular items of clothing Some young people identify as one gender, but their school wants them to wear the uniform of the opposite gender", "Your school needs to think carefully about the reasons why you aren\u2019t wearing school uniform to make sure it\u2019s not breaking the law and treating you unfairly. If the school listens to you, but has its own good reason to keep the uniform as it is, you might then get into trouble if you carry on wearing something that isn\u2019t school uniform. You might be sent home to change, and then come back to school wearing the right uniform. The school should tell your parents that this has happened. Sometimes it might not be possible for you to change \u2013 for example if your uniform has been lost and you haven\u2019t had time to replace it. School needs to be reasonable about how it deals with this.", "If you carry on coming to school without the right uniform, your school might take more serious action, according to its behaviour management policy, and you might end up being excluded."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/at-school/beyond-school/": ["Once you reach school leaving age, which is 16 for most people, you don\u2019t have to stay at school You will have a number of options open to you once you are old enough to leave school Even if you leave school, you are still protected by your \u2018children\u2019s rights\u2019 until you are 18", "You may be desperate to leave school \u2013 or you may want to stay at school or in some other kind of education for as long as possible. In this section, we talk about what could happen next, and your rights to stay in education beyond school in Wales.", "You can leave school in Wales once you reach the last Friday in June in the school year when you have your 16th birthday. So you can leave school as long as you\u2019ll be 16 by the end of the school summer holidays. \u00a0This means that most people will already be 16 when they leave school. If your birthday is at the end of June or in July or August, you will still be 15 when you can officially leave school. You still have the right to education at this age. The Welsh Government has decided that you don\u2019t have to go to school after this age.", "You can certainly stay in education if you want to once you have reached school leaving age. Your school may have a Sixth Form where you can study for A levels. You might prefer to go to a local college to study for A Levels or for other vocational qualifications such as BTecs or NVQs. You may find you have more freedom at a college compared to staying on at school.", "Education at school isn\u2019t compulsory beyond 16 in Wales, so school Sixth Forms and colleges may only allow you to study there if you have a minimum number of GCSEs (or an equivalent qualification).", "An apprenticeship is work-based training which still involve learning. You will learn practical skills and may also go to college. You are employed, so you have employment rights, and you will earn money while you learn. This is a good option if you want to carry on learning, while earning money at the same time. You can find out more about Apprenticeships here.", "You don\u2019t have a \u2018right\u2019 to go to university, but university should be accessible to everyone who would like to go and study. You will usually have to have A Levels (or equivalent) to go to university, and you will have to pay fees to the university, as well as have enough money to live on while you are at university.", "You can leave school and start work at 16 if you want to. There are rules in place to protect you from working in a place or in a job that could harm your health or development. If you start work at 16, you can\u2019t work quite as many hours as you can once you are 18. Find out more on our \u2018Leave School to Work\u2019 page."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/relationships/my-rights/": ["You will have relationship that are \u2018private\u2019: with your family and friends and with other adults, and relationships where the other person is involved in providing you with a public service Your rights are there to protect you if you are abused or hurt in a private relationship Your rights put extra duties on people involved in public services like the police and social workers, to support you if you need help", "Even though you might not think of it this way, you have relationships with lots of people. Each relationship is different. You have relationships with", "In law, some relationships are \u2018private\u2019. The relationships you have with your family and friends are usually private. You, your family and friends are free to manage your relationships in the way that you choose, as long as no one \u2013 including you - is being treated badly in one of those relationships. In other relationships, where someone is responsible for a service you receive from the government or another organisation, your rights are more important. Your rights tell you how these people should behave towards you.", "Your parents, step parents and grandparents Your brothers and sisters, step-brothers and sisters Other family members Your friends Other children you meet Adults involved in public services like teachers, doctors and youth workers Adults who you meet because they are friends or for some other reason.", "The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child deals with your rights as far as these public organisations, and the people who work for them, are concerned. People like teachers, social workers, the police, doctors and nurses, youth workers all have to treat you with dignity and respect, whatever has happened", "This doesn\u2019t mean you aren\u2019t protected in your \u2018private\u2019 relationships. Your rights mean that the government has to make sure there are procedures in place to make sure you are treated properly in your private relationships too. This means that there are laws to deal with people who hurt you and don\u2019t look after you properly, and laws to make sure you are protected.", "In this section of the website we look at your relationships", "We also look at you rights, and the law around:", "with your family with friends and other children; and with other adults    Sex and Consent Getting serious in a relationship; and What to do if someone is making you do something you don\u2019t want to be doing"], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/relationships/sex-and-consent/": ["You have the right to privacy \u2013 but you also have the right to be protected from sexual abuse and exploitation The law in Wales (as in England) is designed to protect you from harm that can come from having sex when you\u2019re not in an appropriate relationship or if you\u2019re not old enough If you know what the law is, you can protect yourself, and make sure you don\u2019t get into trouble", "You may want to have sex but it\u2019s worth knowing what the law says and how it\u2019s designed to protect you. The UNCRC protects children from sexual abuse and exploitation. The laws in Wales are clear about how old you should be before you have sex, and that you should only have sex if you agree.", "Some of these laws might feel like they are stopping you from doing things you want to do. As well as the protections that are in place to keep you safe, you do also have the right to privacy. If you are having sex when you are too young you are breaking the law. If the police are made aware of this, they will have to decide whether to take action against you or your partner. Even if you are having sex before you are 16, you should be able to protect yourself from getting pregnant or getting sick from having sex.", "Sex includes penetrative sex, as well as oral sex and touching each other sexually.", "\u2018Consent\u2019 is about being able to agree to something without anyone bullying you, pressurising you or otherwise trying to manipulate you to have sex. It also means agreeing to something without someone giving you something like alcohol or drugs so you will say yes more easily.", "In Wales, the age of consent is 16. This is when the law says you are old enough to give consent to have sex. This doesn\u2019t mean you have to have sex once you are 16 if you don\u2019t want to. It does mean that if you are under 16 and have sex with someone who is older than 16, the person you have sex with could get into trouble.", "If you have sex when you are younger than 16, you are breaking the law \u2013 even if you are both the same age.", "The best way to consent to sex is to be clear and tell the person that you\u2019re with that you want to have sex. \u00a0This means the other person knows where they stand too.", "If you change your mind later on, even if you\u2019ve started having sex, you should be clear that you don\u2019t want to have sex. If you\u2019ve had something to drink or taken drugs, you might say yes to sex even if you wouldn\u2019t have done if you were sober. The person you\u2019re with has a responsibility to make sure you are really consenting to have sex and it\u2019s not just because you\u2019ve been drinking.", "Just because you had sex with someone once doesn\u2019t automatically mean you have consented to have sex with them again.", "You\u2019ll need to talk to the person you\u2019re planning to have sex with and make sure you\u2019re both comfortable with it. Sometimes, the way the other person is behaving may make you think that they are agreeing to have sex, but you shouldn\u2019t rely on this. If they haven\u2019t told you that they want to have sex, you should check and make sure that it\u2019s what they want. If they have said that they want to have sex, but seem unsure from the way they are behaving, you should check that it\u2019s really what they want to do.", "If you think the other person has agreed and you start having sex, and then the other person changes their mind, you should stop.", "If the other person has been drinking or has taken drugs, you should be extra careful to make sure they agree to having sex \u2013 if someone is drunk or under the influence of drugs, they may not be able to consent to sex, even if, at the time, they say that they do want to have sex, or seem to be agreeing to have sex.", "Some people may not actually say they don\u2019t want to have sex \u2013 they may be worried about upsetting you or that you will tease them or tell other people. Even if someone doesn\u2019t say they don\u2019t want to have sex, you need to think about how they are behaving and whether they seem reluctant. Some people might even say yes when they don\u2019t actually want to have sex.", "Consent is not straightforward, so if you\u2019re not sure that the other person wants to have sex, or if they have been drinking or taking drugs, don\u2019t do it.", "You can be arrested and charged with rape. This is a very serious offence, and could mean you end up in court and with a criminal record which you will have to tell people about if you want to go to college or university, or whenever you apply for a job.", "Although the age of consent is 16, if you both want to have sex with each other, and you\u2019re a similar age, the police may decide not to take any action. If one of you is 15 and the other is much younger \u2013 may be 13, then the police, and others, might be worried that there is a problem. Even if the police decide not to take any action, your parents may be cross or upset and concerned that you are having sex before you are legally allowed to.", "Yes. You can\u2019t give consent to have sex if you are under 13, so if you have sex with someone under 13, you could be arrested. You could even end up with a criminal record which stays with you your whole life. If you are the one who is under 13, you won\u2019t be in trouble with the police, but your parents may be concerned and upset about what has happened.", "If your partner is over 18 and you are under 16, he or she could get into trouble unless he or she thinks you are older than 16. If you are under 13, anyone who has sex with you could get into trouble with the police \u2013 it doesn\u2019t matter how old they thought you were when you had sex.", "You should be able to get contraception if you are under 16. You can buy condoms in chemists or supermarkets at any age. You can always get advice about sex and talk to a doctor, a nurse or a sexual health clinic about sex without your parents knowing about it. If you are under 16 and want contraception, your parents won\u2019t need to know unless the doctor or nurse is worried that you don\u2019t fully understand what\u2019s happening and the implications of contraception.  You can find out more about contraception here."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/relationships/my-family/": ["You have the right to live with your family, and to have your family life respected You may not always be able to live with your family, but that doesn\u2019t mean that they aren\u2019t important If you\u2019re living with your family and someone is hurting you, you have the right to be protected", "Your relationships with your family, especially your parents but also brothers, sisters, grandparents and wider family, are some of the first and most important relationships you have in your life. Your family life is protected, even if you can\u2019t always be with your family. The law is there to protect you if your family relationships don\u2019t work out.", "Your family relationships are \u2018private\u2019 relationships, so your rights, and the law, don\u2019t really interfere to tell you what you can and can\u2019t do. The law does protect you if you are being harmed by someone in your family.", "For some children\u2019 and young people, this will be a simple question with a simple answer, for others it will be a more difficult answer. Your family isn\u2019t necessarily the people you live with, or the people who are responsible for you. Even if you aren\u2019t living with the people you consider to be your family, you should be able to stay in touch with them if you want to, and as long as it\u2019s in your best interests.", "Sometimes, families don\u2019t work as well as they should do. Sometimes parents can\u2019t look after their children, or don\u2019t look after them properly. If this happens, you may be taken away from your parents so that you can be looked after properly. If you get into serious trouble with the police, you might end up having to spend time in youth detention accommodation \u2013 a Young Offender Institution, a Secure Training Centre, or a Secure Children\u2019s Home. If one of your parents or a family member breaks the law, they might end up in prison. You might not be able to live with your family all the time if you have complex needs that need lots of medical care or other support.", "Your family are still your family whether you are living with them or not. Depending on what has happened though, someone different may have parental responsibility for you, as well as your mother, who always has parental responsibility for you unless you are adopted by a new family \u2013 and your father, if he has parental responsibility. This means that they can make the important decisions about you that your parents would normally make.", "This doesn\u2019t mean the people making decisions are your family.", "Parental Responsibility is the term used to describe all the decisions and duties that a parent has to look after a child. The person (or people) with parental responsibility for a child must give you a home and care for you. They have to make decisions about things like your education, any medical treatment you need (until you are old enough to make the decision yourself). They should tell you off if you need to be told off, and keep you safe as you grow and develop.", "Parental responsibility normally lasts until you are 18, but as you get closer to 18 yourself, you will find that you have more and more opportunity to make decisions for yourself, with your parents \u2013 or the people with parental responsibility for you \u2013 able to offer advice and guidance if you want it.", "When you are born, your mum automatically has parental responsibility for you, and your dad does if he is married to your mum when you are born. If your parents are in a same sex relationship \u2013 you have 2 mums or 2 dads, then both parents can have parental responsibility.", "There are a few ways that other people or organisations can have parental responsibility for you. If your dad wasn\u2019t married to your mum when you were born, he can get parental responsibility. A step parent (someone who marries your mum or dad later on who isn\u2019t your biological parent) can apply for parental responsibility.", "If your parents have died and asked someone to look after you as a Guardian in their will, the guardian will have parental responsibility.", "If you have a special guardian, that person (or those people if there are more than one) will have parental responsibility for you, shared with your parents.", "If your parents aren\u2019t looking after you properly and there is a care order in place, the local authority where you live will have parental responsibility for you, along with your parents.", "A parent doesn\u2019t lose parental responsibility just because you aren\u2019t living with them. If both your parents have parental responsibility for you, and they split up, they will both carry on having parental responsibility for you and should both be involved in big decisions that have to be made about you.", "If you are adopted, your adoptive parents get parental responsibility for you. Anyone who had parental responsibility for you before the adoption will lose it, including your birth mother.", "You have the right to stay in touch with your family if you want to. This is your right. If you want to have contact with your parents, or one of your parents, but there\u2019s a problem with this, a court might end up deciding what should happen in your best interests. Even if you can\u2019t see your family regularly, you may be able to keep in touch through letters or phone calls.", "The people with parental responsibility for you have a responsibility to bring you up and to care for you. Wherever you live, there will be rules about what you can do and what\u2019s acceptable and not acceptable behaviour. Some rules and behaviours will be about day to day living in the house \u2013 things like keeping your bedroom tidy or doing the washing up. Other rules, especially as you get older, might feel more difficult for you. Rules about what time you have to be home by and where you are allowed to go.", "Your parents \u2013 or the people with parental responsibility for you \u2013 have a responsibility to keep you safe and to help you grow and develop. They will also be thinking about anyone else who lives in the house, including any brothers or sisters you have. If you\u2019re living with a foster carer, it could include other children staying there.", "If you think a rule is unreasonable, you can try and talk to the people you live with about it and explain why it should be different. If you\u2019re living with a foster carer or in a children\u2019s home the Local Authority may share parental responsibility with your parents, so they will be able to make decisions about you. Your foster carer will do lots of the practical things your parents would do, like feeding you, making sure you have clean clothes, and going to parents\u2019 evenings.", "It\u2019s not unusual to disagree with the people you live with. As you develop your own personality and beliefs about life, you may find you have different ideas to your parents. It could lead to disagreements and arguments. This happens for lots of families as children grow up. If it\u2019s becoming very difficult to live with your family, because they want you to do things their way, and you want to do things differently, family mediation might help. This is an opportunity talk through your differences and issues in a safe space with someone independent who may be able to help you come to a new way of getting on.", "You have the right to be protected from violence, abuse and neglect by the people who are supposed to be looking after you. In Wales, if you\u2019re living with your family and someone is hurting you, you are protected by laws made both by the UK Government and the Welsh Assembly Government. These laws mean that you can be looked after by someone else, if necessary, either for a short time, or for longer.  If the person hurting you is a member of your family, but doesn\u2019t live with you, you are still protected. The person who has hurt you has broken the law and will be punished if the police are involved. Things should also be put in place to help you recover from what has happened.  You can find out more about this in our section about being \u2018At Home\u2019.", "Your family isn\u2019t just your parents. It includes brothers and sisters, grandparents, uncles and aunts, cousins\u2026", "Families don\u2019t always get along. This doesn\u2019t mean you shouldn\u2019t see other members of your family if you want to. You might be able to agree with your parents that you can see the people you want to see. You might want to see your grandparents \u2013 may be you live with one parent, and they are the grandparents on the other parent\u2019s side. If you can\u2019t agree, it may be possible for a court to make an order so that you can have contact with that person or people.", "If the person you want to stay in touch with has hurt you or is a risk to you, a court may decide that it is not be in your best interests for you to have contact with them. The court will have to listen to you before it makes that decision.", "It\u2019s important that your family and your family links to brothers and sisters are respected. If you are being looked after by the Local Authority, they have to make arrangements for you to keep in touch with your brothers and sisters as well as other members of your family."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/relationships/getting-serious/": ["Your rights when you\u2019re under 18 are all about protecting you so you can grow and develop healthily You have a right to privacy, but a lot of what you can do in a relationship depends on what the law \u2013 and your parents \u2013 say until you\u2019re 18 If you\u2019re being forced into a relationship, or to do something you don\u2019t want, you should be protected", "Having a relationship with a girlfriend or boyfriend is a special thing. When you\u2019re under 18, and want to get serious with someone, you might feel like the rights that are there to protect are actually making things difficult for you. You have a right to privacy, but your children\u2019s rights give your parents (or the people with parental responsibility for you) the role of looking after you and guiding you until you\u2019re 18.\u00a0 This means that you might have to get your parents\u2019 permission to do some of the things you want to do \u2013 and also that you can get into trouble for doing some things if you\u2019re not at a certain age.", "You can have sex legally as long as you\u2019re 16. If you\u2019re under 16 (but over 12) and your partner is a similar age, and you both want to have sex, you will be breaking the law, but it will be up to the police to decide whether to take any action if they find out about what is happening. The police may decide not to take any action, but your parents may be concerned about you having sex at this age. Find out more on our Sex and consent page.", "You should only have sex with someone if it\u2019s what you want to do \u2013 so if you are worried or not sure, you should say no, and not feel pressured into doing anything. You can find out more about this, here.", "You have to be very careful to make sure that the person you want to have sex with also wants to have sex with you. You can\u2019t assume that someone who has agreed to have sex with you before will always want to have sex with you every time you want to. If you have sex with someone who doesn\u2019t want to, you could be arrested for rape.", "Even if you both want to have sex, if one of you is under 13, the older one can get into serious trouble if you go ahead.", "If you\u2019re going to have sex, you should use contraception unless you want to get pregnant. You can buy condoms in chemists and supermarkets. In some areas in Wales you can get free condoms using a C Card. You can ask your doctor or a nurse or go to a sexual health clinic for advice and information about sex and contraception without your parents knowing. If the doctor is happy that you understand all the implications, he or she can give you other forms of contraception like the pill, or implants without your parents knowing. It\u2019s worth knowing that condoms can stop you getting a sexually transmitted infection as well as stop you getting pregnant.", "Depending on what your situation is, your partner might be able to come and live with you in your home, or you might be able to go and live with them.", "You can leave home when you\u2019re 16 with your parents\u2019 permission. If you\u2019re both over 16 and your mum or dad or people with parental responsibility for you agree, this should be OK. If you\u2019re both under 18, and want to rent your own place, then the landlord of the property will need an adult to sign the rent agreement and may ask the adult to guarantee the rent payments.", "If one of you is 18 or older, he or she will be able to sign the rent agreement.", "If one of you is 16 or 17 and can\u2019t live at home because of something that\u2019s happened and might be made homeless, the local authority should help you to find somewhere to live.", "If you move in together, you don\u2019t have to do anything official apart from telling organisations like the bank (if you have a bank account), the council and the benefits agency if you are receiving benefits that you have moved, and what your new address is If you are at college or university, you should tell them what your new address is. You should tell your doctor and your dentist (if you have one) too. Changing where you live may change the benefits you get, so you should check this before you move out. You\u2019ll get a form through at some point to add you to the electoral role. You need to fill this form in to be able to vote in elections.", "At the moment, in Wales, your relationship won\u2019t have any special status if you live together without getting married or having a civil partnership. You may not want to think about things like dying, but if your partner dies and you aren\u2019t married, you won\u2019t be entitled to anything unless he or she has made a will including you.", "There\u2019s not much you can do unless you had a legal agreement, called a cohabitation agreement, which set out what would happen if you split up. This can cause lots of problems, especially if you have children, or if you can\u2019t afford to stay where you are living once your partner moves out.", "You can get married (whether you are in an opposite sex or same sex couple) when you are 16 as long as your parents, or the people with parental responsibility, agree. Once you are both 18, you can marry or have a civil partnership without your parents\u2019 permission.", "If you do get married or have a civil partnership, your relationship is given special status in law. It means that if one of you dies, the other will have special rights in relation to any property owned by him or her. It means that if you split up, the courts have to work out who gets what according to special rules. It means that if you have children, you will both automatically get parental responsibility.", "It\u2019s illegal in Wales for someone to force you into marriage, however old you are. Read more about forced marriage and what you can do if you\u2019re worried about it, or if you have been forced to get married, here."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/relationships/friends-and-other-children/": ["In Wales, your rights are there to make sure that you are protected from harm Your rights and the law don\u2019t really play a big part in your friendships with other children if things are going well Your rights, and the law, are important if you are being treated badly by other children \u2013 or if you are treating someone else badly", "If everything is going well with your friends and other children that you know, there\u2019s no need for a law to tell you what to do. Your right to privacy means that the law won\u2019t tell you how to be friends with someone, or whether you have to be friends with someone. The only reason the law might affect you if you and your friends together are making life hard for someone else.", "If your friends or other children are making life difficult for you, perhaps you are being bullied or hurt by other children, or you are being treated differently and unfairly for some reason, then the law can help.", "If you\u2019re being bullied at school, the head teacher and the teachers should deal with this and make sure that the behaviour policy is followed. Most schools in Wales have to have a behaviour policy which deals with bullying. \u00a0If the bullying is also racist or you\u2019re being hurt, you might want to think about telling the police because the people involved could be breaking the law. You will need to tell someone what is happening if you want them to help you. If you don\u2019t want to tell a teacher directly, you could tell your parent or carer, or some other adult you trust who can help you talk to the school about what is happening.", "If you\u2019re being bullied out of school, you can try and deal with it yourself, by telling the other child to stop. If this doesn\u2019t work, your first step is to tell someone what is happening. It may be that another adult \u2013 may be your parents \u2013 can talk to the child\u2019s parents. If the bullying doesn\u2019t stop, you may need to take other action. Depending on what the other child is doing, he or she may be breaking the law.", "If someone has hurt you, even if it isn\u2019t bullying, they may have broken the law. Being hurt can be something physical, like being hit or cut, or it can be emotional. Emotional harm could happen if someone is threatening you or bullying you without physically hurting you.", "The law won\u2019t protect you from a broken heart if you split up, but if a boyfriend or girlfriend hurts you physically, or is threatening you and forcing you to do things, then they are abusing you. This is breaking the law. You may not want to tell someone about this. Your partner may threaten you not to tell someone what\u2019s happening. If you don\u2019t tell anyone, the longer this behaviour will go on. The sooner you do tell someone, the sooner you can be protected.", "On social media, and online generally (in chat rooms and gaming) people aren\u2019t always who they say you are. If you haven\u2019t met someone in real life, it can be difficult to know who you\u2019re really agreeing to be friends with. The law won\u2019t tell you who you can and can\u2019t be friends with online, but if someone is trying to be friends with you or other children because he or she wants to hurt you, then the police may be involved.  Find out more about your rights online here.", "You can send pictures of yourself to your friends and to other children, using your phone or a tablet or computer, but once the picture has been sent, you have no way of getting it back. The people you send the picture to could show other people, even if you didn\u2019t want that to happen. Depending on what\u2019s in the pictures, perhaps you\u2019re being asked to take a picture of part of your body, the person or people asking you to send the pictures could be breaking the law.", "You have to make a decision about whether to go along with this or not. If your friends are trying to make you do something that breaks the law, like stealing or hurting someone, then you could get into trouble with the police if you do what they want. If you do get into trouble, your rights \u2013 and the law \u2013 will make sure you are treated with respect. You should be able to tell your side of the story and explain what happened, but if you have broken the law, you may still get into trouble, even if you were being encouraged by your friends.  If you\u2019re part of a gang that breaks the law a lot, you could get in trouble, even if you weren\u2019t the person who broke the law. If you know what\u2019s going on, the police can deal with you as if you had broken the law yourself.  You can find out more about this here."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/relationships/doing-things-i-dont-want-to-do/": ["Everyone has rights \u2013 so if you are doing something that affects other people\u2019s rights, you may end up in trouble, even if someone is making you do it If someone is making you do things that are hurting you (rather than other people), your rights, and the law are there to protect you Whether you are doing something that\u2019s breaking the law, or being hurt yourself, the best way to stop it is to tell someone", "Although your rights protect you, they won\u2019t stop you getting into trouble if you do something that is wrong. Your rights just make sure that you are treated properly while you are in trouble. If you break a rule or break the law, it doesn\u2019t really matter that someone made you do it. Whoever deals with any punishment that comes out of what has happened might take into account that you were pressured, but \u2013 you still did it.", "If someone is making you do things that are harmful to you \u2013 perhaps forcing you to have sex, or to get married, your rights, and the laws in Wales, are there to protect you.", "If someone tries to get you to do something that you\u2019re not comfortable with, or that you know is wrong, what can you do? The other person might want you to do things for them, get involved with bullying other people, or even breaking the law, like shoplifting or hurting other people. It could be one person doing this or a group of people. It might even be a gang that you are a member of.  If you are breaking the law, you can get into trouble with the police \u2013 even if you\u2019re only doing it because you\u2019re scared of what the other person will do if you say no. If you tell someone about what\u2019s been going on, you may get into trouble, but this is also the best way to stop what\u2019s happening. At school If this is happening at school, you should tell a teacher you trust. If you can\u2019t think of a teacher you want to talk to, a school counsellor might be able to help, or your parents or carer. Most schools will have rules about behaviour and will take action to stop this kind of bullying. If you end up breaking school rules, and even breaking the law, this can have a huge impact on you for the rest of your life. You could end up being excluded from school, or even in trouble with the police. Even if someone is bullying you into doing something, you will probably be the one to get into trouble, not the bully.  Find out more about being in trouble at school here. On the street If someone you hang out with outside school is making you do things you don\u2019t want to do, you need to find someone you can trust to talk to and work out a strategy to make this stop. Even though it\u2019s happening outside school, you might be able to talk to a teacher if there\u2019s no one at home to talk to. If what you\u2019re doing is breaking the law, may be stealing or damaging property or hurting someone, you could tell the police. You might also get into trouble if you have broken the law as well, but you will get credit for owning up and for saying sorry.  Find out more about being in trouble with the police here. In a gang If you\u2019re in a gang and you\u2019ve been asked to get involved with things that you know are wrong, it can be difficult to leave. You may not want to tell anyone what\u2019s happening, but if you don\u2019t you will stay in the same position, and risk getting into trouble with the police. This can have a huge impact on your life.", "If someone is pressurising you to have sex or forcing you to have sex, you haven\u2019t consented, so it\u2019s against the law. You might be worried that you will get into trouble if you tell someone \u2013 may be your mum or dad or a teacher. They may be upset but they will want to make sure you are safe, so if you can tell someone, you should do. You can also go to the police. If you\u2019re worried about this, you can ask someone to help you.", "It is never your fault that someone has had sex with you when you don\u2019t want to or if you\u2019ve been pressurised into it \u2013 whatever the other person says.", "If someone has given you gifts, may be taken you out and looked after you, and then asks you to have sex with them, this is wrong. You might also have arrived in Wales from another country and the person who brought you here (or someone else) says you have to have sex before you can have your papers or passport back. This is exploitation and is against the law in Wales.", "If you\u2019re in this situation, you might feel that you have no way to get out of it. It\u2019s often an older person who will behave like this. As a child, you can feel powerless to do anything and to get help.", "You might be happy with the situation, but the law says that this kind of exploitation this is wrong, so the person who\u2019s doing this could get into trouble with the police.", "The law in Wales says that you can only get married if you are over 18 \u2013 but if your parents agree, you can get married when you are 16. In some cases, people think that this means they can agree to their child getting married, even if the child doesn\u2019t agree to it.", "In Wales, it\u2019s against the law for anyone to be forced to get married. If you usually live in Wales (or England) and you are taken to another country to get married, the same applies. The people who have forced you to get married could end up in jail for 7 years.", "If you \u2013 or someone else \u2013 is worried that you might be in a situation where you are going to be forced to marry someone, either here or abroad, you can apply to the court for \u00a0a \u2018forced marriage protection order\u2019. A forced marriage protection order can include things that people can\u2019t do, as well as things that people might have to do, to make sure you are protected.", "If someone does something they aren\u2019t supposed to do under the order, they can go to prison for up to 5 years.", "The law protects you even if you have already been forced into a marriage. You can get a forced marriage protection order after the marriage has taken place. You will be able to apply to have the marriage can be \u2018annulled\u2019 \u2013 which means it will be as if the marriage never happened (which is different to divorce).", "The Forced Marriage Unit can give you advice and help you if you are worried about being made to get married or if you are already in a forced marriage. You can also get help from Women\u2019s Aid or the National Domestic Violence Helpline\u00a0on\u00a00808 2000 247.", "If someone you are very close to, or have been very close to in the past, including a partner, or someone in your family, is controlling you or forcing you to do things, threatening you and really having a big impact on your life, they could be breaking the law, especially if you are over 16.", "If you\u2019re under 16 and the person threatening you and controlling you is someone who\u2019s supposed to be looking after you \u2013 like your mum or dad or a carer, then they may still be breaking the law."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/relationships/other-adults/": ["Some adults have a responsibility to behave in a particular way with you because they are providing you with a public service Your rights mean that these people have to respect your rights, treat you with dignity, and not abuse you or be violent towards you Other adults you might know don\u2019t have these duties, but if they do treat you cruelly or abuse you, they can be punished", "The law doesn\u2019t tell people how to behave in their \u2018private relationships\u2019 \u2013 but it will step in to stop someone who is being cruel, or violent or abusive to someone else. If an adult (who isn\u2019t either of your parents or someone else who should be caring for you) is behaving like this towards you, they can be punished. Social workers, and may be even the police, can step in to make sure you are protected and treated properly.", "Some adults you meet as you grow up will be working in a public service like school, hospital, or even the library. They are carrying out work for the Welsh government or for the local authority. Your rights mean that these adults have extra duties to treat you properly and to respect your rights. Some of these adults may also be in a \u2018position of trust\u2019 to you. This means that the adult has some kind of power over you. This power will be positive in most situations. People in positions of trust to you include teachers, social workers, doctors and nurses, youth workers and the police. They must not act in a way that abuses that trust or power.", "If you are doing something wrong or unsafe, another adult may step in and talk to you, whether you know them or not. It will depend on the situation and where you are. If you are at a friend\u2019s house, then the adults in charge there might tell you off. If you\u2019re out in public and you do something wrong, or unsafe, an adult might talk to you about it.  Only your parents can hit you \u2013 and then only in some circumstances. The only time another adult can hit you is if your parents have employed him or her to look after you and have told the person that they can do this. There\u2019s more about this here.", "If an adult you know is abusing you, either hurting you somehow or forcing you to touch him or her or have sex, he or she is breaking the law. If the adult has told you that what he or she is doing is a secret, and that you shouldn\u2019t tell anyone then it is probably wrong. It might be hard to tell someone what is happening, but you should try and tell someone you trust.", "Even if you want to be in this relationship, if you are under 16, and the other person is over 18, he or she could be breaking the law.", "If the adult is someone in your family who you live with, or someone you are (or have been) in a serious relationship with, and is controlling you and threatening you so you can\u2019t live properly, then they are breaking the law.", "If someone is \u2018in a position of trust\u2019 then they shouldn\u2019t try and have a relationship with you that includes having sex with you. This could be a teacher or a foster carer, a social worker or a youth worker. It could also include anyone like a sports coach or a priest or vicar at church. The only relationship they should have with you is what\u2019s appropriate for their role at work. It doesn\u2019t matter if you want the relationship too. If someone is in a position of trust to you, they are breaking the law if you are under 18.", "You have the right not to be treated differently and unfairly for any reason. This is discrimination. In Wales, you shouldn\u2019t be discriminated against because of your sex or your sexual orientation, your race or religion, or because you have a disability. You also shouldn\u2019t be discriminated against because of marriage or civil partnership, pregnancy or gender reassignment. This applies to adults who are involved in public services, like teachers, social workers or the police, but also people who provide private services. This could include adults such as shop workers, people at a cinema or somewhere like soft play or a theme park.  If anyone treats you differently and unfairly for one of these reasons they are breaking the law. The way to deal with this in most cases is to make a complaint to the organisation or business that the person works for. If this doesn\u2019t sort things out for you, you can take the matter further to court or a tribunal. The Equality Advisory Support Service can give you more information about this.  If you\u2019re being discriminated against at work, you can find out more in the Work section of this website.", "Normally, it\u2019s against the law to discriminate against someone because of their age, but this doesn\u2019t always apply, especially if you are under 18. You can find out more about this in our section on Shops and Services."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/work/my-rights/": ["Your main rights as a \u2018child\u2019 are about being with your family, having access to education and to opportunities to grow and develop safely You are not expected to work \u2013 but as you get older and become more independent, you may well want to start working part time No one should force you to work or to do anything that is unsafe, inappropriate or you don\u2019t want to do", "If you\u2019re under 18, you\u2019re entitled to all the rights contained in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, although of course, the older you are \u2013 the closer to 18 \u2013 the less you\u2019ll feel like a child and the more you\u2019ll want independence. Getting a job gives you financial independence and your rights protect you from being able to have this independence without being treated badly.", "For some young people, working is more than just about independence. Your circumstances may mean that you have to start earning money as soon as possible.", "Whether you are looking for part time work to make some extra money or need to start work or an apprenticeship, you have rights which protect you.", "If you\u2019re being forced to work, you have rights too \u2013 although the people making you work may try and tell you that you have no rights. It\u2019s even more important that you understand what your rights are and how you can make sure you are protected from this kind of exploitation, especially as a child or young person.", "Article 32 UNCRC says that the Government should protect children and young people under the age of 18 from \u2018economic exploitation\u2019 and from doing work that is harmful to your health or development or which would stop you getting your education. This includes making rules about the minimum age you can be employed and the hours you can work.", "There is also a general principle in the UNCRC that means you should be protected from discrimination.", "Rights in international treaties like the UNCRC have to be accepted by national governments for them to be really useful. The Welsh Government has taken steps to make sure that the UNCRC is followed in Wales. At the moment, most law relating to employment is made by the UK Government in Westminster, not by the Welsh Government in Cardiff, so when it comes to being in work and employment the same laws apply in England and Wales. Some of the schemes that are in place to put the law into practice may be different between England and Wales. For example the scheme which will support you if you\u2018re in an apprenticeship.", "There are employment protection laws which apply in Wales and cover many aspects of employment once you reach school leaving age, as well as the kind of work you can do before you can leave education. These include:", "The Children and Young Persons Act 1933", "The Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992", "The Employment Rights Act 1996", "The National Minimum Wage Act 1998", "The Working Time Regulations 1998", "The Maternity\u00a0and\u00a0Parental Leave Regulations\u00a01999", "The Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations 2006", "The Pensions Act 2008", "The Equality Act 2010", "The Apprenticeships, Skills, Children and Learning Act 2009", "Once you reach the age you can leave school or education, the rights and protections in these laws apply to you if you are in work. We look at how these rights work for 16 & 17 year olds, and for apprentices on other pages on this website."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/work/i-dont-feel-safe-at-work/": ["You should feel safe at work You shouldn\u2019t be treated differently to other people at work You shouldn\u2019t be threatened or bullied to do work in the first place, or while you\u2019re at work", "Whether you\u2019ve got a part time job at the weekend, you\u2019ve left school and are in an apprenticeship or have started full time work, you should feel safe at work. You shouldn\u2019t be asked to do things that are dangerous to you, and you shouldn\u2019t have to put up with being badly treated by people you work with, or by customers/clients. As a child or young person under 18, your main rights are to do with receiving an education, growing and developing healthily, so this is the background to any work you do, whether it\u2019s full time or part time.", "\u2018Health & Safety\u2019 is the name given to rules at work that are designed to protect workers from (mostly physical) risks. The rules mean that the person you are working for should have looked at the job you are doing, worked out if there are any risks, and made sure you are protected from those risks. This could include wearing protective clothing, making sure you have the right training to do a particular job, making sure you are properly supervised, or that you work with other people. It will be different for every role.", "Even work in an office, which might seem very \u2018safe\u2019, is covered by health and safety rules to make sure you have a safe place to work. Things like the equipment you use, the cleanliness of where you work, and things like fire safety would all be covered by this.", "If you don\u2019t feel safe at work because of this kind of risk, your work should have a system for reporting it. This could be to your manager or to HR \u2013 every organisation will be different, so you need to check what your employer has in place. If you report a problem and nothing is done, you might want to consider talking to someone more senior in the organisation, or discussing it with the Health and Safety Executive who are responsible for Health and Safety at work. If you have an accident at work, you should be able to make a note of it in an accident book.", "Discrimination is treating someone differently \u2013 and unfairly - because of a particular characteristic. This could include your gender, because of your race or your religion, the language you speak, a disability that you might live with, if you are pregnant or taking time off to look after a child. If you are treated unfairly because of your age, this can also be unlawful discrimination.", "Discrimination at work can happen in lots of ways. It can be \u2018direct\u2019 discrimination \u2013 which is when you are treated differently directly because of a particular characteristic e.g. a man and a woman apply for the same job but the man is given the job because he is a man \u2013 and not because he was the best person for the job. Discrimination can also be \u2018indirect\u2019 \u2013 when something that applies to everyone has a bigger impact on a particular group of people who share the same characteristic. e.g a rule at work that says that no one can wear any kind of hat or head covering at work will be more difficult for people belonging to religions which require its followers to wear something on their head.", "You might find you are treated differently because you are young. This is just as wrong as treating someone unfairly because of their gender or their race.", "If you are being treated differently and unfairly at work for some reason, you can ultimately go to the Employment Tribunal to resolve the problem. Before you go to the Employment Tribunal, you need to try and sort things out at work. The business or organisation you work for should have a grievance procedure to help you sort things out. If this doesn\u2019t work, and you need to consider legal action, you will need a \u2018litigation friend\u2019 to help you if you are under 18.", "Remember that there is usually a 3 month time limit to bring a claim to an Employment Tribunal.", "Harassment is when someone behaves towards you in a way that puts you down and you find unacceptable. It could happen in lots of ways, and could be related to something like your race or your gender. It can also be a one off incident or something that keeps happening. Bullying, which is threatening or aggressive behaviour towards you by someone with more power than you (or you think has more power than you), is sometimes included as a kind of harassment.", "Bullying and/or harassment can also be a health and safety issue if it makes you feel unsafe at work and causes you to suffer from stress, or if someone is physically hurting you.", "You might be reluctant to complain about something that\u2019s happening to you at work. You might be working for a very small organisation, or the person who you want to complain about is more senior to you \u2013 and might even be the person you\u2019re supposed to approach with problems. This might make it all feel very difficult, but there are people who can help you. You could speak to the Citizen\u2019s Advice Bureau, ACAS or to the Health and Safety Executive for advice and support."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/work/i-want-to-leave-school-to-work/": ["In Wales, you can leave school on the last Friday in June on the academic year when you are 16 Your \u2018children\u2019s rights\u2019 still apply even if you leave school to work full time when you are 16 The laws that protect you if you leave school to work mainly come from UK law and not from the UNCRC", "In Wales, you can leave school and start full time employment once you reach the last Friday in June in the academic year when you turn 16. Technically, you are still a \u2018child\u2019 \u2013 and you still have children\u2019s rights until your 18th birthday. This means that there are still some restrictions on the amount or time you can work, and when you can work.", "You can leave full time education on the last Friday in June in the academic year when you turn 16. In Wales, there is no requirement to continue in any kind of education or training beyond this age, so you can go straight into full time employment if that\u2019s what you\u2019d like to do. After this point, it\u2019s your choice whether you stay in education in Wales. If you\u2019d like to stay in some kind of education, or mix work and training, there are lots of options open to you. You can read more about the options for education and training once you\u2019re 16 here.", "If you want to stay in education but need financial support to do so, you might be eligible for Education Maintenance Allowance.", "You should be protected from any kind of work that can harm your health or development. You also have the right to rest. This means that until you are 18, there will still be some kinds of work you can\u2019t do. You might not be able to work as much as you would like because of limits on the number of hours you can work until you are 18.", "Once you are 16, you can work a maximum 40 hour week, and no more than 8 hours a day. You should be given a 30 minute break once you have worked for 4.5 hours, and you must have 12 hours\u2019 rest between each working day, and at last a 48 hour rest period each week. You can\u2019t normally work between 10 p.m. and 7 a.m., unless you work in agriculture, retail trading, postal or newspaper delivery, a catering business, hotel, public house, restaurant or a bakery. If for some reason you do have to work beyond 10 p.m. \u2013 because there is no one else available to do the work, you must stop at midnight. You should not be made to work between midnight and 4 a.m.", "Once you reach school leaving age, you will be entitled to receive the National Minimum Wage (NMW) until you are 25. At 25, you will be able to claim the National Living Wage. The NMW is a fixed amount and depends on how old you are. From 1st April 2017, the NMW for 16 and 17 years olds is \u00a34.05/hour and for 18-20 year olds, it is \u00a35.60. The levels usually change every April so it is worth checking to see what the current levels are.", "Your employer can choose to pay you more than the NMW depending on the type of job you are doing, but it doesn\u2019t have to. You have to decide whether you are prepared to work for the amount of money that is offered. You could talk to your friend and find out what they are being paid, to see if what you are being offered seems fair.", "You will need to check with your employer when you will be paid (and how you will be paid) but many employers pay monthly, which means you won\u2019t get paid until you have been at work for a month. If this is going to cause you problems, talk to your employer \u2013 often there will be a scheme in place to give you an advance of wages, or a loan perhaps if you need to buy some suitable clothes or a travel card to get to work, or just to live for the first month.", "Apprenticeships are a specific type or employment which combines work and on the job training as well as college or other education. You can find out more about apprenticeships here.", "Once you are 16, there are a number of employment rights that apply to you. Some of these will depend on whether you are an employee or a worker. If you are self-employed, you do not have these employment rights \u2013 but be careful because sometimes, employers will try and claim that you are self-employed, even if you are actually a worker.", "All employees are workers, but not all workers are employees. Employees have the most employment rights and protections. You can find out more about whether you are an employee or a worker and the kind of employment rights you have here.", "The basic employment rights for all workers and employees include:", "the\u00a0National Minimum Wage protection against unlawful deductions from wages the\u00a0statutory minimum level of paid\u00a0holiday the statutory minimum length of rest breaks protection against unlawful\u00a0discrimination protection for\u00a0\u2018whistleblowing\u2019- \u00a0if you report wrongdoing in the workplace not to be treated less favourably if you work part-time Statutory Sick Pay Statutory Maternity Pay Statutory Paternity Pay Statutory Adoption Pay Shared Parental Pay", "Your employer should let you know what will be expected of you when you start work. Most employers will give you some kind of an induction to show you around and explain how things work and the rules that apply in the workplace. Every workplace is different but some things that will be important to pay attention to from the beginning will be", "The time you are supposed to start work What you are supposed to wear for work How you will get to work \u2013 whether there is parking available or if your workplace is on public transport routes Whether you can buy lunch on site or nearby \u2013 or whether you need to take a packed lunch with you."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/work/im-an-apprentice/": ["An apprenticeship is a great way of developing your skills to do a particular job while earning money Completing an apprenticeship will give you a work-based qualification As an apprentice, you have employment rights as well as your children\u2019s rights that apply until you are 18", "Just because you have left school doesn\u2019t mean you can\u2019t continue to learn. For some people, staying in education isn\u2019t the best way for them to develop. Apprenticeships offer an alternative way of gaining skills while working at the same time. Although apprenticeships involve learning, you will still be working so you will have employment rights, such as the right to be paid a minimum level.", "An apprenticeship is a way of gaining skills and training while working. The \u2018learning\u2019 element of the apprenticeship may happen on the job, as you work, in college or at a specific training centre. It will depend on the type of apprenticeship you are on and how your employer wants you to learn. During the apprenticeship, you will towards a work-based qualification which will be at least Level 2 from the Credit and Qualifications Framework for Wales (CQFW).", "In Wales, apprenticeships are open to anyone aged 16 or over who live in Wales. There\u2019s no upper age limit, although apprenticeships are usually associated with younger people.", "There is a minimum hourly rate that you must be paid if you are an apprentice. Your employer can choose to pay you more, but doesn\u2019t have to do so. The current (January 2018) minimum hourly rate for apprentices is currently \u00a33.50 if you are under 19, or if you in your first year of apprenticeship (even if you are 19 or older). This will rise to \u00a33.70 an hour in April 2018. Once you are 19 (and have completed the first year of your apprenticeship) you are entitled to the relevant National Minimum Wage rate. This is \u00a35.60 for 18-20 year olds (and will rise to \u00a35.90 in April 2018) and \u00a37.05 for 21-24 year olds (and will rise to \u00a37.38). Once you are 25, you become entitled to the National Living Wage.", "If you are an apprentice, you\u2019re also an employee so you have the same employment rights as anyone else. If you are under 18, there will be some restrictions on the number of hours you can work, and when you can work those hours, compared with employees who are 18 or older, but otherwise, the same rights apply. As well as your rights around working hours, you will be entitled to rest breaks during the working day (depending on how many hours you work) and holidays.", "You should be treated fairly \u2013 not discriminated against or bullied or exposed to dangerous situations. You have the right not to be unfairly dismissed once you have worked for 2 years. As your apprenticeship is for a fixed period, if your employer tries to end the apprenticeship early, you may be able to claim damages for breach of contract even if you haven\u2019t been working for 2 years. You will also be entitled to rights such as sick pay, maternity and paternity leave and pay and other rights to time off. Sick pay, maternity pay and other forms of statutory pay are often dependant on you earning a minimum amount which you may not reach if you are on the basic apprenticeship rate.", "You can search for apprenticeships in Wales on the CareersWales website.  You can find out about the National Minimum Wage, the National Living Wage and Apprenticeship minimum hourly rates here.  You can find out more about employment rights here."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/work/i-want-a-part-time-job/": ["If you\u2019re not old enough to leave school, you can get a part time job to do alongside your education Your rights as a child have priority, so there are some quite strict rules about what you can and can\u2019t do and how much you can work If you do have a part time job and you are treated badly, there are things you can do", "If you\u2019re under 16, you shouldn\u2019t have to work in Wales. You should be free to grow up, to learn about the world, to make friends and play. Your parents are responsible for bringing you up and they should provide everything you need to grow up healthily. As you get older, you may want to get a job. Having a part time job can give you more independence as you earn your own money. You can learn lots of valuable skills ready for when you leave school, and it can be lots of fun. The rules around working when you\u2019re a child are designed to protect you, and to make sure that any work you do doesn\u2019t stop you getting an education, or harm your development.", "Once you can leave school \u2013 which is on the last Friday in June in the academic year of your 16th birthday \u2013 the rules change slightly. If you are over school leaving age, you can find out more about the kind of work you can do here.", "The general rule is that you can get a part time job once you are 14. You can work if you are younger than 14, but only in what\u2019s called a \u2018performance role\u2019 \u2013 so if you are modelling or acting or something like that.", "You aren\u2019t allowed to do any kind of work that will be harmful to your health, your development or your well-being. If you\u2019re under school leaving age, you can only do a part time job, involving \u2018light work\u2019. This would include a paper round, helping out in a shop or hairdresser, dishwashing in a caf\u00e9 and similar types of work.", "You can\u2019t work in a factory or on an industrial site or a mine. You can\u2019t work in the transport industry or on a merchant ship. You won\u2019t be allowed to do most jobs in pubs or betting shops, and your Local Authority may have other restrictions on where you can work and the kind of work you can do.", "There are limits on the number of hours you can work, depending on whether the work is during the school term or the holidays, and depending on the days you are working.", "In term time, you can work a maximum of 12 hours a week. You can work up to 2 hours a day Monday \u2013 Friday and on a Sunday. If you are 13 or 14 you can work 5 hours on a Saturday. 15 and 16 year olds can work 8 hours on a Saturday.", "In the school holidays, 13-14 year olds can work a maximum of 25 hours a week. You can work 5 hours a day on weekdays and Saturdays and 2 hours on a Sunday. 15-16 years olds can work a maximum of 35 hours a week. You can work 8 hours a day on weekdays and Saturdays and 2 hours on Sundays.", "As you are expected to be at school or being educated either at home or somewhere else such as at a Pupil Referral Unit:", "You can\u2019t work during school hours. You can\u2019t work before 7 a.m. or after 7 p.m. You can only work for a maximum of 1 hour before school, unless your Local Authority says otherwise.", "If you\u2019re under school leaving age, there are no rules about what you should be paid \u2013 so the person you are working for can decide what he or she wants to pay you and you can decide whether to work for that amount of money or not. Once you are school leaving age, rules are in place to make sure you are paid a minimum amount. Find out more about working once you are school leaving age here.", "National Insurance is a payment made by people in work once they are 16 or older. It is paid to the Government and is used to pay for benefits that adults can receive. You don\u2019t have to pay National Insurance if you are under 16.", "If you work for more than 4 hours, you should have a break of at least 1 hour. You should also have at least a 2 week break from any work during the school holidays.", "Although \u2018employment rights\u2019 that apply to adults don\u2019t apply if you\u2019re under school leaving age, there are still some basic things that you should know about it you have a part time job. If you are treated differently for some reason \u2013 because of your race or religion, or because you are a girl or a boy, or because of your age.  The person employing you may have to get a permit from the Local Authority allowing him or her to employ children.  If you are working in a \u201cperformance role\u201d, working on a film or modelling, the producer of the performance will have to speak to your school and to the local authority and explain how you will be able to keep with your school work. If you can\u2019t go to your usual school because you are involved in this kind of work, you will need to have a tutor or have some other arrangement in place to make sure you can continue your education."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/work/work-experience-and-unpaid-internships/": ["Work experience and internships can be paid or unpaid If you are doing \u2018work\u2019 rather than just finding more out about a job, you might be entitled to be paid (even if the organisation isn\u2019t paying you) If your work experience or internship means that you are a \u2018worker\u2019 you will have some employment rights", "If the job you want needs you to have experience, how do you get the experience you need? If you don\u2019t know what you\u2019d like to do when you start work, how do you find out? Work experience and internships can be good opportunities to find out more about an industry, or a particular job, that you are interested in. Although this isn\u2019t \u2018work\u2019, it\u2019s important to know what you can expect.", "Work experience is an opportunity to spend some time finding out about a particular job or industry. It\u2019s also a good way of finding out what \u2018work\u2019 is like \u2013 and how it will be different to school. Some schools will set aside a period of time \u2013 may be a week or two weeks \u2013 for work experience when pupils are in year 10 or 11. Your work experience might be organised by the school or you might be able to organise it yourself if you want to spend time in a particular organisation. You could also undertake work experience as part of a course of higher or further education. You might also organise your own work experience to try and make yourself more employable.", "It\u2019s unlikely that you will be paid during a period of work experience if you are being shown around, \u2018shadowing\u2019 someone else and sitting in on everything they do, without doing any tasks for the organisation. The organisation you are doing your work experience with may offer other \u2018perks\u2019 like travel expenses.", "If you are carrying out specific tasks for the organisation, and you are expected to show up on time and stay for specific hours, you might actually be classed as a \u2018worker\u2019. If you are under school leaving age, you won\u2019t be entitled to the National Minimum Wage, but you might want to question whether you are doing work experience or actually working for the organisation. If you are over school leaving age, you might be able to claim the National Minimum Wage.", "If you think you should have been paid because of the way your \u2018work experience\u2019 was structured, you can report the organisation to HMRC, the Government organisation that deals with the National Minimum Wage.", "If you are doing work experience on a placement for a year or less as part of a higher or further education course, you aren\u2019t entitled to be paid for the work you do (although some organisations may agree to pay).", "If you\u2019re not \u2018working\u2019 you don\u2019t have employment rights, but you should still be treated properly and not made to do anything that would be harmful to your health or development. If you\u2019re doing work experience while you are at school and you don\u2019t feel safe, you should tell your parents or your teacher responsible for the work experience placement.", "An internship is also work experience. The term \u2018internship\u2019 is usually used in connection with students and graduates who are looking for work experience with the aim of then securing a permanent role in a specific area of work. An internship can be any length of time \u2013 but it\u2019s important to know your rights because the longer the internship, the more likely it is that you will be \u2018working\u2019. If the work experience you are considering is called an \u2018internship\u2019, it is likely that you will have left school \u2013 or be over school leaving age.", "Many organisations offer unpaid internships. It\u2019s true that an internship can be a really valuable way of gaining experience in an area, but at the same time, you shouldn\u2019t be exploited. If what you are doing amounts to \u2018work\u2019 then you should be paid at least the National Minimum Wage. You will have other rights \u2013 either as a worker or as an employee depending on the way the internship is structured.", "The exception is if your \u2018internship\u2019 is volunteering with a charity, a Non-Governmental Organisation (\u2018NGO\u2019), a voluntary organisation or an associated fundraising body. If you are volunteering with one of these organisations, you do not have to be paid the National Minimum Wage.", "If you are doing \u2018work\u2019 you will be a worker or an employee. As well as being entitled to the National Minimum Wage, you will also have other protections, depending on your employment status. Find out more about whether you are a worker or an employee here."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/work/welsh-at-work/": ["Welsh is an official language of Wales and some organisations have to meet standards to make sure their services are available in Welsh If you don\u2019t speak Welsh, you may find that you can\u2019t apply for some jobs (or you can apply but won\u2019t be selected) Even if your job doesn\u2019t require you to speak Welsh, you should be able to speak Welsh at work with others who speak Welsh", "All children and young people have the right to use the language of their family \u2013 even if these aren\u2019t shared by the majority of the population where you live. This applies to Welsh \u2013 and to English \u2013 in Wales. It will also apply to other languages spoken by people who have come to Wales from other parts of the world. You shouldn\u2019t be prevented from speaking Welsh at work, or be treated unfairly because you speak Welsh, at work.", "Welsh is an official language in Wales, as well as English. The Welsh Government has made it a priority to increase the number of Welsh-speakers in Wales generally, and to help organisations develop a bilingual workforce. Public sector organisations like central government and local authorities, police and fire services have to follow certain standards for the use of Welsh at work. These organisations have to have a scheme in place to explain which services they will provide in Welsh, and how and when they will do so. This has been in place since 1993. For organisations to provide services in Welsh, they need to employ people who speak Welsh.", "If you don\u2019t speak Welsh, and your job doesn\u2019t need you to speak Welsh, your employer might offer you opportunities to learn Welsh and encourage you to speak Welsh at work.", "Although you can\u2019t be refused a job because you are not Welsh, you could be refused a job if you don\u2019t speak Welsh. Organisations can say that it is essential, or desirable that someone speaks Welsh for a particular job, even if that means that it is harder for someone who is not Welsh to get the job, as long as this can be justified for that job. This will depend on the job \u2013 what is involved and where the job is based. If the employer has analysed the job properly and come to the conclusion that a Welsh speaker is essential (or desirable) in a post, you probably won\u2019t be able to complain about it.", "You have the freedom to use Welsh with others in Wales. Even if your work doesn\u2019t require you to speak Welsh, you should be able to speak Welsh with others at work. In Wales, if you are treated unfairly because you speak Welsh at work by other people who are also Welsh, it could be seen as bullying or unfair treatment. If you are not Welsh and you are treated unfairly because you don\u2019t speak Welsh, this could be race discrimination as well as bullying.", "Your employer can make it a requirement of your job to speak Welsh if it\u2019s appropriate for the job you are doing. While you may have to speak Welsh while you are doing your job \u2013 perhaps if you are working with other Welsh speakers on a work task, this would be OK. If you are treated unfairly and differently for speaking your own language (not Welsh) with someone else at work when you aren\u2019t doing a work task, this could be discrimination."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/work/paying-tax/": ["If you earn enough money, you have to pay tax, however old you are While you\u2019re at school, you probably won\u2019t get anywhere close to earning enough money to pay tax Once you leave school and start working, you probably will have to pay tax and National Insurance", "If you earn above a certain amount of money, you have to pay tax. It doesn\u2019t matter how old you are. If you\u2019re at school full time, you probably won\u2019t have enough time to earn enough money to pay tax. Once you leave school and start working, this will probably change.", "Income tax is a payment you make to the Government, based on money that you earn. It is used to fund things like hospitals, schools and public housing, and to make investments in things that we all use like roads.", "Income tax is something that you have to pay once you hit a particular level of earnings. It doesn\u2019t matter how old you are, although if you are at school it\u2019s unlikely that you would be working enough hours or get paid enough to pay income tax. Once you have left school and are working, you may well earn enough to pay tax.", "If you are 16 or 17, your minimum hourly rate is \u00a34.05. If you are being paid at this rate you probably won\u2019t earn enough to pay tax. You need to be earning around \u00a3958 a month (\u00a3987.50 from April 2018) before you will have to pay income tax.", "Income tax is a percentage of your earnings. You don\u2019t pay anything on the first \u00a311,500 you earn in a year (\u00a311,850 from April 2018). You pay 20% on anything you earn between \u00a311,501 and \u00a345,000 (\u00a346,350 from April 2018). You pay 40% tax on anything you earn that is over \u00a345,000 and less than \u00a3150,000. These levels change every year. You can check the most up to date position here.", "Your employer will take off income tax and national insurance and pay that to the government before you receive your pay. You will receive your \u2018net\u2019 pay.", "If you decide to work for yourself as a \u2018freelancer\u2019, you will still have to pay income tax but you must work out how much you have to pay and submit a tax return. This is called \u2018self-assessment\u2019.", "National Insurance is another payment you must make to the Government once you start earning a certain amount of money. By paying National Insurance, you build up your entitlement to receive state benefits such as maternity pay and your state pension. You only start paying National Insurance once you start earning the National Minimum Wage.", "You pay National Insurance once you earn more than \u00a3157 per week. If you earn over \u00a3157 and up to (and including) \u00a3866 per week, you pay National Insurance at 12% of your earnings. If you earn over \u00a3866 per week, you pay of your earnings on everything above that level.", "There are lots of different taxes used by the Government to raise money.", "When you buy a house, you have to pay something called \u2018Stamp Duty\u2019 which is related to how much you pay for the house. When someone dies, \u2018Inheritance Tax\u2019 may be payable on the money they leave If you own more than one house, and sell one of them, you might have to pay something called \u2018Capital Gains Tax\u2019 on the difference between what you paid for the house and what you sold it for. If you have a company, the company will pay corporation tax on money that the company earns"], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/work/im-being-forced-to-work/": ["You can work \u2013 if you would like to, and you\u2018re the right age But you should not be forced to work And you shouldn\u2019t be taken away from where you live and be made to work somewhere else", "As a child, your children\u2019s rights are all to do with growing up in a safe environment, being looked after and being able to develop healthily. These rights are available to all children in Wales, whether or not they were born here.", "You might not believe that anyone in Wales would try and force a child to work \u2013 but it can happen. Some children are brought to Wales either from other places in the UK or from places outside the UK and made to do housework, farm work or are forced to do other things that they don\u2019t want to do instead of going to school, playing and relaxing or doing other things that children and young people should be able to enjoy. It\u2019s not very common for this to happen, especially if you\u2019ve grown up in Wales or the UK, but if it happens to you, you need to know that it\u2019s wrong and there are people who can help you.", "If you\u2019re under 18, and you\u2019ve been brought to Wales from another country, you have the same rights as any other young person in Wales. This means that you shouldn\u2019t be forced to work. You may be here without any other members of your family and be worried about where you will live or what you will do if you try and stop working. You may not have your identity documents (like your passport) or the person or people making you work may have taken them away from you. In Wales, the support is here so that you will be given somewhere to live and will be supported to return home if that\u2019s what you want. If it would be dangerous for you to return home, it may be possible for you to stay in Wales.", "Some people use threats to make children or young people work for them. They might say that they will hurt you or members of your family if you doesn\u2019t do the work. Other people might tell you that you owe them money and has to work to pay it off. Sometimes, the people who want you to work will say they can use magic to keep you doing what you are doing. You might start out doing something for someone because they tell you they love you and it\u2019s important that you do whatever they want.", "Whatever the reason you\u2019re working, if you\u2019re being made to do things that you don\u2019t want to do, or you are uncomfortable with; if you\u2019re not being allowed to go to school, or you\u2019re working more hours than you are supposed to for your age, there\u2019s a problem.", "If you are being made to work, to do things that are damaging to your health and development, it\u2019s wrong. The law in Wales says that there are only some kinds of work you can do if you are 13 or under, related to \u2018performing\u2019 \u2013 on stage or TV, or if you do some modelling. Even when you\u2019re 14, you can only do \u2018light work\u2019, and you are only allowed to work a certain number of hours. Even if you feel comfortable doing the work you are doing, if it prevents you from having your rights to grow and develop, to be educated and to have time to play, it is wrong.", "Some of the people you come into contact with might be worried about you and might be suspicious about how you are being treated. Some of those people \u2013 for example the police or people who work for the council \u2013 have to report their suspicions.", "Just because the person making you work still lets you go to school doesn\u2019t mean it is right that you are having to work. If you are being forced to do something you don\u2019t want to do, it\u2019s likely that your school work will suffer. If you are being made to work but you are also going to school, you might be able to tell someone at school about what is happening to you.", "It might seem impossible that you will be able to tell someone what is happening to you \u2013 and you may be worried that you will get into trouble, either with the authorities, or, perhaps worse, the people who are forcing you to work. Remember that if you can tell someone like a teacher, a doctor, a policeman or a social worker what is going on, they should try and help you."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/play/my-rights/": ["Children and Young People have a right to rest and to play which covers all kinds of activities you might want to take part in during your free time While you\u2019re enjoying your free time, your other rights are there to protect you The Welsh Government takes your right to play and relax seriously", "Saying that you have a \u2018right to rest\u2019 or the \u2018right to play\u2019 doesn\u2019t really cover everything in Article 31 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. This is about making sure that everyone under 18 can have time out to enjoy loads of different activities. Some people like to spend their free time learning new skills, others want to meet with friends and hang out. There are lots of opportunities across Wales, and your rights in Article 31, and the other rights in the UNCRC mean that you should be able to enjoy as much as possible without being treated unfairly or made to feel unsafe.", "The UNCRC recognises that children and young people should have time and opportunity to rest, and to play, and to take part in \u2018cultural experiences\u2019 \u2013 things like drama and film as well as art and other experiences. This is all included in Article 31 of the UNCRC \u2013 which recognises that it\u2019s important for you to have time to do what you want to do on your own terms, as well as to have opportunities to take part in organised leisure and cultural activities.", "Other rights in the UNCRC that are important so that you can properly enjoy your right under Article 31 include your right not to be discriminated against for any reason \u2013 this could help if you are being treated differently by a club or organisation you go to or want to go to. You have the right to meet with your friends, so this could help if someone is trying to stop you hanging out with your friends somewhere.", "The Welsh Government recognises the importance of your right to play and relax. It has promised that all decisions that it takes should take into account the UNCRC. The Welsh Government has also made it a requirement that local authorities must look at whether there are enough opportunities for you to play where you live.", "When the Welsh Government, or any local authority, makes a decision about how land is used in Wales \u2013 and when any public organisation makes these sorts of decisions, this commitment means that it should take into account your right to rest and leisure experience cultural activities. Local authorities should consider this if they are making local rules (\u2018byelaws\u2019) about where people can go and what they can do, and when they are making decisions about what to spend money on.", "Wales has lots of very different communities \u2013 some very rural, in remote countryside, some very urban in big towns and cities. Each community has different challenges to deal with to make sure that children living there have access to opportunities for play, leisure and cultural activities. Public bodies in Wales need to recognise this and help all children in Wales have access to the same kinds of leisure opportunities.", "We\u2019ve looked at your right to rest and leisure by breaking it down into different sections:", "Places to play and relax Time to play and relax Opportunities to play and relax Staying safe while you play and relax Clubs and organisations Meeting with friends"], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/play/staying-safe-at-play/": ["You have a right to rest and to play, and protected from things that could harm you You should feel safe whilst enjoying your free time when you are playing out or in an organised activity If something has happened to make a place where you go feel unsafe, you can take action to change things", "Things like litter and rubbish, dogs, other children and young people, broken or unsuitable equipment, and some adults can make the places where you go to spend your free time unsafe. If you feel uncomfortable or threatened you may not relax properly and enjoy the time you have to play or be with friends.", "Litter and rubbish can make somewhere feel unwelcoming and unsafe. Some rubbish can also be dangerous: broken glass or used needles can cut you and make you sick. Rubbish, especially dangerous rubbish, needs to be cleared up by specialists who have the right equipment to keep safe.", "Local councils can fine people who leave litter in public, so if there is a problem where you go to play, you could let the council know.", "You can find out how to contact your local council here.", "Depending on where you live in Wales and the places that you go to play, there may be a Public Spaces Protection Order (PSPO) in place which says that people can\u2019t take their dog there. Local councils can put a PSPO in place to cover a particular area which might include a park where you go. Even if dogs are allowed, they may have to be on leads and not allowed to run free. If there is a PSPO in place to stop people taking their dogs to the park or public space where you go to play, there should be a sign up explaining this. If someone takes their dog there and doesn\u2019t follow the rules, they could be fined. If someone has their dog somewhere where it shouldn\u2019t be, you should get in touch with your local council, which made the PSPO, to report it.", "You can find out how to contact your local council here.", "Anyone walking a dog has to clean up if the dog does a poo. People who don\u2019t clean up after their dog can be fined.", "If you\u2019re in a public place, you have the same right as anyone else to play and relax there. If other children or young people are making you feel uncomfortable and trying to make you go somewhere else, you can decide what to do to try and sort things out. You could try and find somewhere else to go or you could try and work out a way to stay so that everyone can enjoy the same place. If someone is threatening you or hurting you, you should tell an adult that you trust, or talk to the police.", "If someone has broken equipment where you play or used spray paint to leave unpleasant graffiti, they have broken the law. If you know who did it, you can think about telling an adult, or the police, about what has happened. This may stop that person doing something like that again, but it won\u2019t necessarily change the damage that\u2019s been done, so you may have to get in touch with the person or organisation responsible for the park to get equipment mended or replaced or to get graffiti removed.\u00a0 There should be a sign on the park that tells you who to contact if there is damage to equipment.", "If you are at a playground with play equipment that is designed for you to play on and you get hurt because something is broken, you, or your parents should get in touch with the organisation that is responsible for the playground to report the accident, particularly if it is more than just a scratch or small bruise or if something more serious happens to you. They will want to make sure the equipment is safe for you ad other children to play.", "Sometimes, play equipment will have a sign up saying it is only suitable for children above a certain age, or below a certain age. This will usually be a \u2018guideline\u2019 and In most cases, you will be able to decide whether or not you think you can play on the equipment without getting hurt. If you are with an adult who is responsible for you, he or she may make a decision about whether you can go on something or not.", "It\u2019s worth remembering that if a piece of play equipment is designed for younger children, you might break it and spoil it for younger children if you go on it and you are too big for it!", "All adults involved in working with children have to be checked to make sure they haven\u2019t done anything in the past which would make them dangerous to children and young people. If you have any worries about anyone who is organising any activity you are involved in, you should let someone \u2013 an adult you trust - know about it.", "If there are adults where you play who aren\u2019t involved in organising your activities in any sort of official capacity (they are just members of the public, not youth workers or leaders etc), and you\u2019re in a public place, there won\u2019t be any checks on who they are and whether they are safe around children and young people. If you are worried about something, tell an adult that you trust what\u2019s happening. It\u2019s not usually a good idea to talk to an adult you don\u2019t know (unless it\u2019s someone like a police man or woman), especially if you aren\u2019t with an adult.", "If adults or other children or young people are using the park where you play to drink or take drugs, the council might set up a PSPO to try and stop this. If you\u2019re worried about how adults are using a space where you play, you could talk to your local council or perhaps contact the police."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/play/places-to-play/": ["If you\u2019re going to enjoy your right to play, rest and enjoy your free time, there need to be places you can go to do this Access to places and activities depends on lots of decisions made by adults Your views and opinions should be listened to when decisions are being made about places to play", "Having places to go to are an important part of your right to play and relax. This right in the UNCRC is not just about \u2018playing\u2019 either, but about taking part in cultural experiences \u2013 things like going to the theatre and concerts and visiting museums. The Welsh Government has promised to consider the UNCRC every time it makes a decision. Local Authorities also make lots of decisions about the area where you live. These decisions can affect whether you have enough places to play and how you can get to those places. These decisions can be about where to build houses, where to make new roads and decisions about public transport. They ca also be decisions about how the local authority spends money and whether it invests in resources for young people or in something else. When a local authority makes these decisions, it should think about the UNCRC and your rights.", "A decision about where to put a new road could affect somewhere where you go in your free time. A decision about how to spend money could mean that a youth centre you go to could close down or that equipment isn\u2019t updated as often as it should be, because the money is spent on something else. A decision to build a new housing development should take into account where children or young people who live there will be able to spend time. In Wales, when a public organisation like the local council makes a decision like this, it should take into consideration how the decision will affect children and young people.", "Other decisions that can affect where you play are decisions that your parents or the people who look after you make about where they want you to play (or where they don\u2019t want you to play). If an adult has a responsibility to make sure you are kept safe, they should think about where you want to go and play and whether it is safe to let you go there, especially if you want to go on your own. As you get older, you should be allowed to go to more places on your own, and have responsibility for making your own decisions about where is a good place for you and where you will be safe.", "If you think the people looking after you are being unreasonable about where you are allowed to go you can try and talk to them to make them change your mind. If this is difficult, you might be able to get another adult to help you have the conversation. This could be a relation, a family friend, a teacher a youth worker, or a social worker.", "Most decisions by public organisations, like the local authority, give people the chance to give their opinion before the decision is made. Anyone can be involved in this consultation. If a decision is going to be made that affects a place where you go to relax and spend time, you can write or email the organisation and tell them what you think. You can find out which is your local council here.", "If there is going to be a change to the way land is used, there should be a planning application. A notice about this should be displayed where the land is, with details about how you can find out more and how to give your views to the local authority which will make the decision about the change.", "If there is no planning application but you are worried about something, you could contact your local councillor, your Assembly Member (AM) or Member of Parliament (MP) \u2013 these are all people who are elected to represent the views of people who live in a particular area, and should be interested in your views . If you don\u2019t know who to contact, you can find out:", "Who your Local Councillors are https://www.gov.uk/find-your-local-councillors", "Who your AM is http://senedd.assembly.wales/mgFindMember.aspx", "Who your MP is http://www.parliament.uk/mps-lords-and-offices/mps/", "If a decision has been made by a Local Authority that has an effect on where you go to play or relax or spend your free time, you will be able to use the complaints procedure to say why you think the decision is wrong. If you think the public authority has thought about the wrong things when it made its decision \u2013 or didn\u2019t think about things it should have done \u2013 you could make a complaint to your Local Authority. If you think the Local Authority hasn\u2019t dealt properly with your complaint, or if it doesn\u2019t give you an answer within 12 weeks, you can ask the Local Government Ombudsman to look at what has happened. It may also be possible to bring a legal challenge using a procedure called judicial review.", "If you can\u2019t solve your problem through the Local Authority complaints procedure or through the Local Government Ombudsman and want to think about legal action for judicial review, you will need to take legal advice. You may be able to get some help from the Citizen\u2019s Advice Bureau. Some firms of solicitors will give you some free advice to start with. You should try and find a solicitor with experience of public law or judicial review. The Law Society can help you find a solicitor with the right kind of experience to help you.", "You don\u2019t have a right to make a public authority create more places for young people to go, but you can let them know what you think about plans (or lack of plans) relating to places to play. You can email or write to your Local Council, or get in touch with your local AM or MP.", "You may find that you can\u2019t enjoy some facilities as easily as other children and young people. These places might be too far away, or there might not be good roads or public transport to get there. The Government and local authorities in Wales should think about this when they are planning where to build new facilities, how to spend money on road improvements, or when they are organising public transport services."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/play/clubs-and-organised-activities/": ["You might want to spend some your free time taking part in organised activities either at school or outside school If something is available in your area, you should have the opportunity to take part in the same way as everyone else You should feel safe when you are taking part in any organised activities", "Lots of activities are available for children and young people in Wales through clubs and other organisations. Having access to these activities makes your right to rest and to play and leisure a reality, and you should have the same opportunities as every other child in your area to take part. You should also feel safe when you\u2019re taking part in activities organised by a club, and when you\u2019re there, even if you\u2019re not doing anything.", "You have a right not to be discriminated against - treated differently or unfairly for any reason. In Wales, laws on equality mean that you shouldn\u2019t be stopped from joining a club or from taking part in an activity because of something like your sex, your race or your religion.", "There is a special rule which means that in some cases, a club or an activity can just be for a specific group of people. A club or organisation is allowed to restrict itself like this if it\u2019s to help a group that is disadvantaged in some way. A common example is Girl Guiding. Boys aren\u2019t allowed to join Guides, even though girls can join Scouts. This is because Guides is set up to help girls and young women overcome disadvantages in society. Although Guides only allows girls to join, it allows girls of all races and religions to join, and any girl with a disability can join guides too.", "Discrimination isn\u2019t just about being allowed to join a club or take part in an activity. You should have exactly the same opportunities as everyone else in the club and you shouldn\u2019t be treated differently and unfairly in any way. This could include being given a nickname that makes fun of something like your sex or your religion or disability, or people making assumptions about things you can or can\u2019t do if you are disabled. Some of these things might happen because people haven\u2019t thought what they are doing, or don\u2019t understand that what they are saying is hurtful and discriminatory. Other times, it can happen because someone is doing it on purpose.", "Discrimination like this is wrong and against the law, whether it\u2019s done by accident or on purpose. If you think it\u2019s happened by accident, you might be able to talk to the person or people concerned and explain what the problem is. If you think someone is treating you differently on purpose, or you haven\u2019t been able to explain what\u2019s happened to someone who has been treating you differently by accident or because they don\u2019t understand, you could think about making a complaint to try and sort it out.", "As well as your right to play, if you are disabled in any way, you have the right to support to be able to lead a full and active life. This means that you should have opportunities to play and take part in leisure activities the same as every other child in Wales. Organisations and clubs have to make reasonable adjustments to help you take part in an activity if you are disabled. What will be reasonable will depend on how big the club is and what needs to be done.", "Lots of activities for children and young people rely on adults, either as volunteers or who set up as a business. Adults need to be involved to make sure you are safe, that you can take part in activities fully, and to be involved in any organisation that\u2019s required, for example finding somewhere to hold the activity. There\u2019s no law to make adults do this \u2013 it will just depend on who is around, what their skills are and whether they are happy to run a club or activity.", "In Wales, some activities and some organisations are run mainly in Welsh. Welsh is an official language in Wales, and the Welsh Government wants to make sure that there are plenty of opportunities for people to learn and speak Welsh, throughout Wales. You shouldn\u2019t be stopped from joining in with an activity if you don\u2019t speak Welsh, but you can\u2019t expect the activity to be run bilingually.", "Wales is a bilingual country and Welsh and English are official languages. Some organisations, but not all, have a responsibility to make sure that services are available in Welsh and in English, but this doesn\u2019t apply to private organisations at the moment. If you\u2019re taking part in an activity that\u2019s run by a public organisation like the council or a university, you should be able to use Welsh. Otherwise, it will depend on the people running the activity and the resources they have to provide this service. if an activity is provided by a private organisation and none of the adults involved in providing the activities speak Welsh, it will be difficult for the activity or the club to be run in Welsh. You can choose whether to take part in the activity, or not.", "Adults who organise activities with children have to be checked to make sure they haven\u2019t hurt children in the past or done something that might make them a risk to children.", "If your club isn\u2019t organised as part of an after school club linked with your school, it won\u2019t be inspected by Estyn, but the people involved still need to make sure it is run safely.", "If other children at the club are upsetting you or making you feel uncomfortable with their behaviour, and you don\u2019t feel like you can say anything to the children involved, you should talk to the adults running the activity. If this is difficult for you, talk to your parents or another adult that you trust to listen to you and help you.", "If something happens or you feel uncomfortable about the behaviour of an adult who is at the club, you should tell another adult that you trust. This may feel difficult for you but you shouldn\u2019t be harmed or abused by an adult, especially one who is supposed to be looking after you. If there\u2019s no one you feel comfortable talking to about what is happening, you can contact helplines like Childline or Meic. They can listen to you and help you decide what to do next."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/play/time-to-play/": ["Many of your rights under the UNCRC are there to protect you from things which could harm you \u2013 you also have a right to play and relax Having a right to play, rest and relax means you need to have time to do this If someone is stopping you from having time to rest and play, they could be breaking the law", "Being able to relax and enjoy free time means you have to have time for this \u2013 so your time shouldn\u2019t be taken up too much with school and homework, with some other kind of work, or with lots of organised activities. These may be fun things to do outside of school but you should also have time to do things you want to do in your own way and on your own terms.", "You have a right to education which has to be balanced against your right to play and to rest and relaxation. If you get your education in a state school, the amount of time school has to be open is fixed by law. If you are educated at home, it\u2019s up to your parents to organise your education for you in the way they think best. Whether you\u2019re educated at school or at home, you should always have your own time to play and relax.", "If you go to school, it\u2019s important that you have time for a break during the school day. Break times and lunchtimes should be built in to the time you spend in school. If you\u2019re worried that you\u2019re having less time to play \u2013 perhaps your lunchtime has been made shorter, or play time is stopped or made shorter because of something you or other children have done during a lesson, you could raise this with the school council or talk to your teachers about it. Your parents can help you do this. If you think that your worries aren\u2019t being taken seriously, you can use the school complaints procedure to ask why your break times are being reduced or taken away.", "Your school will probably expect you to do homework, especially if you are at secondary school \u2013 and may have rules in place about what will happen if you don\u2019t do your homework. If you think you are getting too much homework, check what your school\u2019s homework policy says. If teachers are setting more homework than the policy suggests, you could ask what the reason for this is. It\u2019s something you could ask the School Council to look into.", "Your parents \u2013 or the people with parental responsibility for you \u2013 have to take care of you and bring you up how they think they should. As long as your parents aren\u2019t neglecting you or hurting you, it\u2019s up to them. Your parents may organise lots of things for you to do at the weekend and in the evening to try and give you lots of opportunities to try different activities and have lots of good experiences.", "If you don\u2019t agree with how your parents are expecting you to spend your time, you could try and discuss it with them and explain what you would like to do differently. If you think this will be difficult, you could see if there\u2019s someone else who can help you have the conversation.", "If your parents, or someone else that you live with, are making you work and do lots of chores without any time to yourself, this could be abuse.\u00a0 If you have no time to yourself and you are being made to work when you aren\u2019t at school (or if you are being made to work instead of going to school) this is wrong and you should try and talk to someone you trust about what is happening to you. This may be difficult if you don\u2019t get an opportunity to speak to anyone. If you see a doctor or dentist, a social worker, a teacher or a policeman or woman, or someone like that and you feel comfortable talking to them about what is happening, they should be able to help you.", "There are also organisations you can telephone or contact online including", "Childline https://www.childline.org.uk/ 0800 1111", "Meic https://www.meiccymru.org/ 080880 23456", "Your main rights when you\u2019re under 18 are about being protected and having opportunities to grow and develop healthily before becoming an adult. The UNCRC gives children and young people the right to be protected from work that might be dangerous or make it difficult for you to get an education, or exploits you. In Wales, there are laws which mean you can only work a limited number of hours and you can only work at certain times. In most cases, you can\u2019t work until you are 13. You can find out more about how long you can work if you\u2019re under 18 in our section about Work."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/online/my-rights/": ["The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child includes rights for children to access information, including online. Other laws protect you while you\u2019re online If you know what your rights are and what the law says about being online, you can make better decisions about what you do online Some of your rights online involve a balance to make sure what you do doesn\u2019t affect other people rights", "You have rights as a child that are helpful and are there to protect and support you when you\u2019re online. These include your right to have access to a wide range of information, your right to privacy, and your right to be protected from things that could harm you and your development.", "Being online is a big part of life. It\u2019s where we communicate with friends when we\u2019re not with them, and where we often go to find things out, and to access entertainment. While we\u2019re doing all this, there are opportunities for others to harm us, or to discover information about us which they can use. Some people use the online space to bully or control. You have a number of rights as a child which affect the time you spend online.", "You have a right to information.", "You have the right to express yourself freely \u2013 as long as you don\u2019t impact on other people\u2019s rights.", "You have a right to privacy which affects how the websites you use can collect and use information you share with them when you are online.", "You have a right to be protected from things that can harm you and damage your development \u2013 so you should be kept safe from people who would try and use the internet to bully or abuse you, and images and content that could be harmful to you.", "The law in Wales is the same as in the rest of the UK. There are laws that cover how organisations can use your information. There are laws that mean that certain types of information should not be shared. These laws can protect you from seeing things that might upset you, but also restrict what you can post online. There are also laws so that people who try and harm you online, or who use online platforms to harm you in the real world, will be punished.", "We want you to be safe when you\u2019re using the internet, and confident so that if something happens that isn\u2019t right, you will know what to do to get help. We\u2019ve put together information sections about your rights and how the law works in Wales, on the following subjects:", "Staying safe online Accessing information online Using social media Information about you online"], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/online/using-social-media/": ["One way of finding and sharing information and communicating with friends online is through social media You should be protected from seeing and hearing things that could be harmful to you on social media If someone treats you badly through social media, they could be breaking the law", "You have the right to information and to share your views and opinions, so this includes what you post on social media. The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child says that the government should protect children from seeing things that will harm them. Although there are some specific laws about some types of content, and some types of online behaviour, there are no general laws protecting you when you\u2019re online, including when you use social media.", "Social media isn\u2019t really set up so that you can be protected from seeing things that might upset you or be harmful to you. Content on social media isn\u2019t \u2018age restricted\u2019, although social media platforms have a \u2018lower age limit\u2019 to have an account. Even though content isn\u2019t age restricted, some content is blocked, and people who post inappropriate things on social media or people who use social media to target a child, could end up being in trouble with the police.", "Just as you should be protected when you use social media, you have to be aware of other people\u2019s rights and the laws that protect them. If you don\u2019t you can end up in trouble with the police yourself either because you posted something you shouldn\u2019t have done, or because you used social media to target someone.", "Each social media platform has its own rule about how old you should be to have an account. For Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat, YouTube and WhatsApp the minimum age is 13.", "You will have to check the rules for each social media platform. Most of the platforms say that they can delete your account at any time and for any reason, so they might do this if they find out that you are too young to have an account.", "Each social media platform has a set of rules that applies to that platform. These rules include things like how old you have to be to have an account, what sort of things are not OK to post, and what the platform can do with the photos and information you add to it.", "Here are the links to the rules for some of the most popular platforms:", "Snapchat", "Instagram", "Facebook", "WhatsApp", "YouTube", "The Children\u2019s Commissioner for England has written some helpful guides to these rules, which you can see here.", "Your rights under the UNCRC are around what the Welsh government and UK government should do to make sure you are protected from seeing and hearing videos or photos or other stuff like memes or gifs that are going to harm you. You should also be protected from the behaviour of other people, adults and other children, who might want to use social media and the internet to harm you directly.", "The way the law works in Wales and in the UK means that people may be breaking the law and could get into trouble with the police if the way they behave on social media could harm you. This includes if they post something that is generally upsetting even if it isn\u2019t aimed at anyone in particular, as well as behaviour that might be targeted directly at you.", "Each social media platform has its rules about what you can expect if you use the platform. Your rights as a child mean that you should be protected from seeing things that are likely to upset you and cause you harm. This could include scary or violent images or videos, or images of people.", "Once you are on a social media platform, there is no \u2018age restriction\u2019 to what you can see. People are allowed to post what they want \u2013 and if it is offensive or upsetting, you have to report it to the platform which will then decide whether to take it down or not. It might get reported to the police, or you can report it. The police have to decide whether to track down who posted it. There can be difficulties if someone has posted something when they are in a different country to you.", "Each social media platform is different but each one has rules and functions so that you can stop seeing posts by people if they are upsetting you. You can also stop people seeing you and your posts, and you can stop them tagging you in posts.", "Each social media platform has different rules about how you can use it but most have \u2018privacy\u2019 settings which allow you to control what people can find out about you. You will need to check what these are for each social media platform you use and decide whether you feel that the privacy options they offer will stop people finding out information about you.", "You may think that the stuff you post online is yours \u2013 but it might not be. Even if it is yours, the social media platform you use may say that it can use your content for its own purposes, even if you have taken the post down. It will depend what is included in the terms and conditions when you sign up.", "Yes you can. Even if the way you use social media isn\u2019t breaking the law, you may get into trouble with your parents or at school for bullying or behaving inappropriately. The social media platform that you\u2019re using might stop your account. If you are breaking the law, you could also get into trouble with the police.", "You\u2019re allowed to have your own opinion about things and you should be able to express that freely on social media platforms. You\u2019re also free to disagree with people. What you must not do is post stuff or behave in a way that could seriously upset someone or that breaks the law. The sort of things that you shouldn\u2019t do on social media include:", "If you post something on social media that shows you broke the law somewhere else, you could end up in trouble for what you did, even if posting it on social media doesn\u2019t break the law. If you post a photo or a video that shows you or someone else hurting another person, the police might use that as evidence.", "Posting something that someone else created without their permission, or pretending that it\u2019s something you created; Posting personal information about other people \u2013 this is sometimes called \u2018doxxing\u2019 Posting an image of someone that you\u2019ve changed to suggest something about them that isn\u2019t true Exchanging images of yourself naked or without many clothes on with someone else \u2013 sometimes called \u2018sexting\u2019 Bullying someone in anyway, including leaving nasty comments and sending bullying direct messages Being hostile or aggressive based on someone\u2019s race, religion, disability, sexual orientation or transgender identity.", "Posting something that\u2019s going to be upsetting to lots of people, or something that targets one individual person can end up with you getting into trouble with the police. You may also have your account shut down by the social media platform where you posted.", "If you get into trouble with the police, your rights are there to protect you and make sure you are treated properly \u2013 but they won\u2019t stop you from being punished. You can find out more about what happens and how your rights protect you if you get into trouble with the police, here."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/online/staying-safe-online/": ["You have the right to access and share information online as long as it isn\u2019t harmful to you \u2013 or what you share isn\u2019t harmful to others You should be protected from seeing and hearing things that could be harmful to you online If you see something upsetting or offensive online, you can report it to the police", "Not just in Wales, but in the UK, everyone including children have the right to say or post what they like online. This has to be balanced with making sure that what is said or posted doesn\u2019t stop other people enjoying their rights. There are laws about what shouldn\u2019t be posted online \u2013 but although something upsets you or is harmful to you as a child, it might not break the law. Generally, there aren\u2019t any \u2018age restrictions\u2019 on what is posted online, so once you are on the internet, you may end up seeing something that isn\u2019t right for you \u2013 but this isn\u2019t breaking the law.", "Because there can be a difference between what is upsetting to you and what is breaking the law staying safe online also means that you, your parents and other people with responsibilities to protect you \u2013 like teachers or youth workers \u2013 have to think about how to use the internet so that it\u2019s safe for you.", "If someone is using the internet to try and harm you directly, there are laws to protect you, so you need to make sure you can recognise when someone might be behaving inappropriately online, and tell someone so that you can get help.", "Staying safe online is also about making sure you keep your information safe online. Please go to My Information Online section to find out more.", "There is no general rule about how old you have to be before you can use the internet. This is something your parents or the people who look after you may make a decision about. Social media platforms which use the internet to function usually have a minimum age before you can have an account (you can find out more about using social media here).", "Some websites and web pages are blocked because of what\u2019s on them, so you won\u2019t be able to see them. Some websites, such as alcohol related websites, ask you to confirm how old you are before you can go onto the website but they don\u2019t have to. Websites with sexual content on them have to have strict age controls on them .", "There are tools that you can use at home (often called \u2018parental controls - your parents or the people who look after you can use them) to stop you accessing certain types of website too. This means you may not see anything harmful to you, but it can also block websites that aren\u2019t harmful .", "If you\u2019re upset by something you see on social media, but it\u2019s not specifically about you or targeting you, you can block the account of the person who posted it, and you can report it to the social media platform. Find out more here. If you see something that is specifically targeting you this could be cyber bullying. You can report this, and you can get help from someone in the \u2018real\u2019 world \u2013 an adult you can trust.", "If you see something that you think is upsetting or offensive online and could be breaking the law, there are different organisations you can report it to. Internet Watch Foundation investigates anything that might be images of child sexual abuse (not just photos and videos but cartoons too).", "If you see something that is offensive because it threatens people because of their race, religion or sexual orientation (or because it encourages others to threaten people for one of these reasons) then you can tell the police. You can find out which police force is responsible for your area using the Police website, or call 101. There is more information about reporting this kind of \u2018hate crime\u2019 on the True Vision website.", "If you\u2019ve seen something online that makes you think that someone has broken the law - may be you\u2019ve seen a video posted by someone you know showing someone being beaten up \u2013 you can report this to the police.", "If you see something that you think is about terrorism, there is information about how you can report it on the Government\u2019s website.", "Although the internet can be a great way of making connections with other people, there are some people who use the internet to try and harm children and young people. This may happen through social media or in online chat rooms or gaming websites where you can talk to other people. It can especially be a problem where you can have \u2018private\u2019 chats with other people online, through direct messages or private chat rooms. You might be asked to take photos of yourself and send them to someone, or film yourself online. You might develop a friendship online with someone who then asks you to meet in real life. Sometimes this might be fine, but they may not be who they say they are.", "If you are worried about anything that you are being asked to do while you\u2019re online, or if someone is trying to meet with you, the safest thing to do is to tell someone you trust what is happening. You should do this even if you are worried that you will get into trouble for what has been going on. If someone is forcing you (or trying to force you) to do things, they are probably breaking the law.", "You might not be worried about what\u2019s happening online \u2013 about something someone is asking you to do, or about a relationship that is developing, but the other person could still be breaking the law. If someone asks you to send a naked picture of yourself, they may be breaking the law. You might also be breaking the law too, for example if you are sending naked pictures of yourself to someone because of what\u2019s in the image.", "If you send someone a picture or a video, or you share it online yourself, either on a website, Youtube or through social media, you can delete it from your account or from what you have in your control, but other people may already have shared it.", "You can start by approaching the website or social media platform where you have seen the image and ask them to remove it. You can also ask search engines such as Google to stop the image being shown in search results.", "If the image is of child sexual abuse, Internet Watch Foundation can help you get it removed."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/online/information-about-me-online/": ["You have a right to privacy which means you should be able to keep your information safe and secure online When you go online, you create lots of information about where you are and what you are doing If organisations hold information about you, they have to keep it safe", "When the internet offers so many opportunities, we don\u2019t always think about the risks of being online any drawbacks. You might not have considered that every time you go online, the people and organisations that own the websites you use are collecting information about you. Your right to privacy doesn\u2019t stop people collecting this information, and the law only protects you if someone uses that information in a way that you didn\u2019t agree to, or to harm you.", "If you know what kind of information is being collected about you, what happens to it and what you can do, you can make better decisions about what you do when you\u2019re online and what information you share. You will also know what to do if someone uses your information in a way you don\u2019t agree to, or which harms you.", "Whenever you go online and use a website, information is being collected about you. The websites you visit, anything you download, any games you play. You may also make information available, for example if you do a quiz online or fill out a registration form to access a game or an app, you will be giving away information about yourself. If you use social media you are making all sorts of information about yourself available to the people who can see your account. When you go online you may also be providing information about where you live and where you are at that time. You might make a comment or posts a picture that shows this, even if you don\u2019t mean to provide this information. If you post a picture of you in your school uniform, this can show people where you go to school.", "Many organisations collect this sort of information about you so that they can show ads to you when you are online about products that you\u2019re more likely to want to buy. Other organisations collect the information so that they can sell it on. There are also people and organisations who will try and collect this information so that they can cause trouble. For example, someone might try and find out personal information that you have used to set up a password on a social media account so that they can hack your social media account. They might also use this information to try and access other online accounts you have \u2013 even online banking.", "There\u2019s no way to stop organisations or individuals collecting information about you when you go online. You have to check what each website is collecting and how they will use the information. If you don\u2019t want the website or the app to have the information, you may not be able to use the website or app.", "Some information, like the websites you visit and what you do while you\u2019re on those websites are collected through \u2018cookies\u2019. A cookie is a bit of text that sits on your computer. If you go back to a website, the cookie tells the website that you have been there before. Whenever you go on a website, you should be asked whether you agree to the organisation behind the website using cookies.", "If you provide personal information, for example if you fill in a form, you should be told how the information will be used and you should have the option to say whether you agree to this.", "You will have to check whether the organisation said what it would do with your information and whether you agreed to that or not. This is where terms and conditions come in. They are quite boring to read, but if you don\u2019t you may not know what you have signed up to. If you don\u2019t understand the terms and conditions, you can check with the organisation.", "If someone has used your information in a way that you didn\u2019t agree to, they may have broken laws about \u2018data protection\u2019. You should ask the organisation about what has happened, and if they don\u2019t or won\u2019t explain what has happened and put it right, you can make a complaint to the Information Commissioner.", "The law \u2013 and even your right to privacy \u2013 doesn\u2019t stop organisations collecting information about you when you\u2019re online \u2013 it only protects you if the information is used in a way you haven\u2019t agreed to or to harm you in some way. Some things you can do to keep yourself safe online include", "Check how the website you are visiting will use your personal information Check your settings on social media and other apps so that you protect your privacy. This includes checking things like location settings which allow people to work out where you are Don\u2019t post information online that people can use to find out more about you. Even a photo can give away information that you might not think about If you use websites which have passwords, make sure your password is secure, don\u2019t share it with other people and change it regularly Be careful when you\u2019re using public wifi which might not have such good security Don\u2019t reply to emails if you don\u2019t know who they are from, and don\u2019t give out personal information online", "If someone uses your personal information to work out a password for an account you have, may be your social media or email, they can go into your account and cause all sorts of problems. If you think you have been hacked, you can report it to the website or app where you have the account \u2013 how you do this will depend on the website or app.", "You can try and change the password on the account. If you use the same password on other accounts you should change all of them so the hacker can\u2019t get into other accounts.", "If someone is going into your accounts and finding out other information about you and controlling or threatening you, you can report this to the police as they may be breaking the law."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/online/accessing-information-online/": ["You have the right to be able to find out information and ideas from lots of places, including online You don\u2019t have a right to go online, although it might be different if not being able to go online means you can\u2019t access information Sometimes you may not be able to access some information because it would be harmful to you", "So much information is online, it\u2019s hard to think what we\u2019d do without the internet. There are other sources of information, though \u2013 books, newspapers and magazines, and your right is to information, but not necessarily to go online.\u00a0 Sometimes, you may need to go online to access the information you want \u2013 more and more organisations are putting information online and not in other formats.", "Just because you can access information online doesn\u2019t mean it will be accurate. Equally, there may be information that you want that you can\u2019t find online, or anywhere else.", "You have a right to access information, in lots of different ways. It is probably easier for you to find a lot of the information you are looking for by going online, but your right is to the information, and not to be able to go online in itself.", "How can you trust that what you read online is true? It\u2019s not always easy to know. Even if something you read is \u2018true\u2019 it may have been presented to you in a way that twists the meaning and is misleading \u2013 this is often talked about as \u2018fake news\u2019. There aren\u2019t many laws that protect you directly from information on the internet that isn\u2019t true", "In Wales, if someone publishes information about a person which isn\u2019t true, they may be breaking the law if the information damages that person.", "You may never know 100% if what you are reading is true or not, but if you choose the websites where you get your information from carefully, you will have a better chance of getting accurate information. Websites with news written by journalists may be a more reliable source of information than other source, because journalists have a code of conduct which means they are supposed to make sure information is honest and accurate. If you are looking for information about a person, there may be an \u2018official\u2019 website about that person which will probably be more accurate than any unofficially websites or fan sites.", "This doesn\u2019t just apply to online information either \u2013 but it\u2019s a bigger problem with online information because it\u2019s so easy to share information online.", "Some websites ask you to confirm your age before you can go onto the main website. This won\u2019t always be a legal requirement, but the business may decide that it\u2019s a good thing to do if the website is about something that isn\u2019t suitable for younger people. For example, websites which have pornographic content on them will have to have strict age controls to make sure people under 18 can\u2019t see the content on these websites.", "If you want information from a public organisation like the government, a local authority or a hospital, you can make a Freedom of Information request. You can be any age to do this. If the information you are asking for is about you or about other people, then other rules may apply too. You can find out more about making a Freedom of Information request here.", "Information is available from other places if you can\u2019t go online at home. Libraries can provide access to information, and most services are free. Even if you don\u2019t have access to the internet where you live, libraries often have computers that you can use. If a library doesn\u2019t have the information you need straight away, they may be able to help get it certain information for you. .", "If you want information from a specific organisation, you can contact them and ask if they will give you the information. If it\u2019s a public organisation, and you can\u2019t find the information you want, or the organisation won\u2019t give it to you, you can make a Freedom of Information request.", "If you want information from an organisation that doesn\u2019t have to respond to a Freedom of Information request, you can always ask \u2013 the organisation can only say no but they might say yes. Depending on the kind of information you want, some of it may be available from other places. Information about businesses may be kept at Companies House. Information about charities might be available from the Charity Commission."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/health/my-rights/": ["You have rights to make sure you can grow and develop healthily, and a right to good healthcare Doctors and other medical staff must always act in your best interests You shouldn\u2019t be treated unfairly for any reason as far as medical care is concerned", "Whether you need to see the doctor for something like an ear infection, you want to talk about contraception or you live with a more serious condition that means you spend a lot of time in hospital, you need to know that you have a number of rights that protect you and make sure decisions that are made take account of your views and opinions and are made in your best interests.", "The UNCRC specifically gives you a right to good quality healthcare. It includes your physical and your mental health.", "Any decision that is made about the medical treatment you receive should be in your best interests. You shouldn\u2019t be treated differently \u2013 and unfairly \u2013 for any reason. When important \u2013 and sometimes difficult \u2013 decisions have to be made, your opinion should be taken into account. You may be able to make the important decisions about which treatment to have \u2013 or whether to have treatment at all. You should have enough information so that you can make any of these decisions knowing all the facts.", "You\u2019ve also got a right to be protected from violence or abuse by anyone who looks after you \u2013 this could be important particularly if you have to stay in hospital or some other place where you receive care.", "Your right to education doesn\u2019t stop just because you are ill. Sometimes you might not feel well enough to learn, but when you do feel well enough, you should be able to continue your education, even if you can\u2019t go to school.", "Making decisions about medical care What happens if you disagree with the doctors or your parents/carers Keeping up with school Staying in hospital Keeping your medical records private Injections and the school nurse Getting contraception What to do if a doctor, nurse or someone else isn\u2019t looking after you properly"], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/health/see-a-doctor/": ["You should be able to see a doctor on your own If you are under 16, a doctor might ask about why you don\u2019t want to have an adult with you, and check that you are safe Sometimes, you can get help and information about medical problems from other places, not just the doctor", "You can see a doctor on your own at any age \u2013 but if you\u2019d like your parent or carer to be with you, that will be fine too. Until you are 16, a doctor or nurse might be worried about why you don\u2019t want to have a parent or carer with you, but if you want to see the doctor on your own, they should respect that.", "Unless it\u2019s an emergency or you\u2019ve been involved in some sort of action, the usual way to go about getting help for a medical problem is to see your GP. GPs are doctors in the community who can give general medical advice about a wide range of problems. They can give you a prescription if you need particular medicine. They can also send you to a more specialist doctor, or a clinic which specialises in particular problems, if this is what you need.", "If you are 16 or older, you can register with a GP yourself. If you\u2019re under 16, normally your parents, or carer will make sure you are registered with a GP. You don\u2019t have to be registered with the same GP as your parents or carer. If you want to register with a GP without your parents or carer knowing, you should still be able to do this, but the doctor may want to ask you some more questions about why you want to do this, and to check that you are safe.", "If there\u2019s an emergency, you may need to go to hospital, to the Accident and Emergency (A&E) department. If you can\u2019t get yourself to hospital, you can call for an ambulance to help you. If there\u2019s an emergency \u2013 if you\u2019ve been seriously injured or burnt, or if someone you are with is unconscious or having difficulty breathing, you can call 999 for emergency help.", "If you are taken to hospital in an emergency, or your GP sends you to see a doctor at hospital, you can still ask to see the doctor on your own if you would prefer.", "Once you are registered with a GP, you usually need to make an appointment to see him or her and talk about what\u2019s bothering you. You can do this by going to the GP surgery, or by phoning them. Some GPs allow you to make appointments online too, although you will probably have to set up an online account to do this. You may be able to see the doctor the same day, or you may have to wait.", "Even if you are registered at the same doctor as your parents or carer, and you are under 16, you can still see the doctor on your own. The doctor (or nurse) might try and find out why you don\u2019t want a parent with you, but you don\u2019t have to tell them.", "Although you can see the doctor on your own to talk to them about any problem you have, the doctor might want an adult to agree to any examination or treatment that you might need.", "The doctor has to be sure that you fully understand the advice he or she needs to give you, what the treatment involves and what could happen. This is called \u2018having capacity\u2019. Every doctor has to be careful that anyone they treat has capacity \u2013 sometimes adults won\u2019t have capacity, so this isn\u2019t just about how old you are. If you have \u2018capacity\u2019, you can agree to treatment without an adult present. This is called \u2018consent\u2019.", "Once you are 16, you can give your own consent. Depending on what the medical problem is and the treatment you need, you may well be able to give your own consent when you are younger than 16. The doctor has a duty to make sure you have capacity in every situation. If you need treatment for something quite straightforward you may have capacity to consent to the treatment, but not if it\u2019s something more complicated.", "If you are under 16 and have capacity but you don\u2019t want to have treatment, the doctor may decide to talk to your parents anyway, if he or she thinks the treatment is in your best interests. You can find out more about this here.", "Your medical information is personal to you, and once you\u2019re 12, you can tell your doctor that you don\u2019t want anyone else to see your medical information. If your doctor thinks that someone else has to be involved to give consent for any treatment you might need, that person will need information about the treatment you need. This doesn\u2019t mean that person should be able to see all your medical records \u2013 only what they need to be able to give consent. You can find out more about this here.", "Chemists, or pharmacists aren\u2019t doctors, but they can sometimes help and give you advice about some medical problems. You can buy some medicines from the chemist, but they may not be able to sell some medicines to you depending on how old you are. You can also go to a chemist if you think you might be pregnant and need emergency contraception. You can find out more about this here.", "There are phone numbers you can ring to get advice about medical problems.", "NHS Direct Wales 0845 46 47 is the phone number to call if you feel unwell but it\u2019s not an \u2018emergency\u2019. You may speak to a nurse first and then a doctor may call you back. You will need to provide some details about yourself. You can speak to a doctor or get information in Welsh or English.", "If you don\u2019t think you need to see a doctor but want to know more about a medical issue, you can use an online resource provided by the National Health Service.", "There is lots of information online about health problems, but if something doesn\u2019t feel right or you are worried about something, you should see a doctor who will be able to examine you and use their knowledge and experience to help you.", "If your doctor thinks you need a particular medicine he or she will give you a prescription which is a document you take to a chemist or pharmacy where you can get the medicine. Sometimes the chemist or pharmacy will be in the same place as the doctor\u2019s surgery, sometimes it will be somewhere else. In Wales, no one has to pay for prescriptions. So if your doctor in Wales has given you a prescription for a medicine, you will not have to pay for the medicine as long as you get it from a pharmacy in Wales."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/health/decisions/": ["You can consent to medical treatment if you are 16 or older, or if you are under 16 but understand what is going on If you can\u2019t consent, someone with parental responsibility should make the decision about whether you should have the medical treatment or not Sometimes, doctors can treat you without consent", "It\u2019s very important that before a doctor or nurse does anything to you \u2013 examine you or treat you - that you, or someone responsible for you, gives permission for this to happen. This permission is called \u2018consent\u2019. Sometimes, you won\u2019t be asked specifically if you agree to something happening. But if you don\u2019t want an examination, or treatment, you can say so. Even if you are not old enough to consent yourself, the doctor and the person who will consent for you should listen to what you have to say.", "Apart from emergencies and some other very specific reasons, a doctor who treats you without your consent, or the consent of someone with parental responsibility for you, could be breaking the law.", "\u2018Consent\u2019 is about giving someone permission to do something. If you go to see a doctor or got to hospital or somewhere else for some kind of medical examination, or treatment, you need to agree for it to happen. To be able to agree and give your permission, you have to be able to understand what the examination or treatment is, and what might happen.\u00a0 This is called \u2018capacity\u2019. You have to agree yourself, without pressure from anyone else on you to make a decision one way or the other. You also have to have been given all the information about the treatment or procedure, including any risks of the treatment, and what might happen if you don\u2019t go ahead.", "If you\u2019re 16 or older, you can give consent for medical procedures \u2013 examinations and treatment. You can also decide not to go ahead with something. Just as with someone over 18, as long as you have all the information about the procedure or treatment and can understand the decision you are making, you can give your consent. This is called \u2018having capacity\u2019 to consent. If you consent to something that the doctors think is in your best interests, your parents (or people with parental responsibility) can\u2019t stop the treatment going ahead.", "If you\u2019re under 16, you can also give consent if you can show that you understand fully what\u2019s involved in your treatment. This will be decided on an individual basis and will also depend on the treatment or procedure involved.", "If you are under 18 and have capacity to consent, but refuse to have treatment, your parents may be able to say that you should have the treatment, or the doctors can ask the Court of Protection to decide what should happen. This will usually only be in very serious situations, when refusing treatment means you might die or suffer serious consequences.", "If you aren\u2019t able to consent to medical treatment, because you\u2019re not 16 and you\u2019re not old enough to have capacity, then someone with parental responsibility can give consent for the treatment. That person has to be able to understand what is happening so that they can consent about treatment for you.", "If an adult refuses to give consent and the doctors think that it would be in your best interests for you to have the treatment, the doctors can ask a court to decide what should happen. The same applies if the person with parental responsibility would like you to have a treatment and the doctors don\u2019t agree that it would be in your best interests.", "In some situations, doctors can treat you without consent from you, or from someone with parental responsibility for you. If there is an emergency situation, and you will die without urgent treatment, the doctors can treat you without your consent. This could be because you are unconscious, and your parents or carer can\u2019t be contacted. You can also be treated if you have an illness that would be a risk to public health.", "You might have a mental health condition which means you don\u2019t have the capacity to consent to treatment of that condition.", "If it\u2019s not one of these exceptional situations, and a doctor or nurse treats you without your consent, or the consent of someone with parental responsibility for you, or without a court decision saying you should be treated, he or she could be breaking the law.", "Sometimes, if someone has been in a bad accident or something has gone wrong for them and their health, they may end up being kept alive but unable to communicate what they want to happen. If this happened to you, the doctors would talk to your parents or the people with parental responsibility for you to discuss what would be the best thing to do. If the doctors and your parents agree, then they will be able to go ahead and do what is necessary to keep you alive. If there is a disagreement about what should happen, the courts will be asked to decide."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/health/staying-in-hospital/": ["If you have an accident, become very ill, or have to have an operation, you may have to stay in hospital to get the best care Your rights don\u2019t stop just because you have to stay in hospital While you\u2019re staying in hospital, all of your children\u2019s rights apply to you \u2013 and some rights that you might not have thought of may be more important than usual", "Staying in hospital can a scary experience for anyone however old. You\u2019re away from home, everything is different, and on top of that, you\u2019re hurt or ill or about to have an operation. All the more reason why it\u2019s important that you are treated according to your rights.", "Whether you have a room on your own will depend on why you are in hospital, what facilities the hospital has, and who else is in hospital at the same time. Even if you don\u2019t have your own room, you have the right to privacy. You should also be treated with respect. This means that you should be able to have privacy even if you aren\u2019t in your own room.", "You should be protected from violence or abuse by anyone who cares for you. If you\u2019re worried about something that has happened to you in hospital, or by the way someone has treated you while you are in hospital, you should tell someone straight away. It doesn\u2019t matter what happened or when. It might have happened while you were having treatment, or while you were asleep or in your bed. You should feel safe in hospital, and be confident that everyone is acting in your best interests.", "You should always be involved as much as possible in what\u2019s happening to you. The people looking after you should give you as much information as possible so that you can understand what is happening to you. They should also talk to you about what is happening and find out what you think. You may not be able to make the decisions about your treatment. If you can\u2019t, the people making decisions about you should listen to your views, and take them into account.", "You can find out more about making decisions in hospital here.", "Most hospitals which have a children\u2019s ward will allow you to have someone staying with you. This will usually be a parent or carer.", "If you have to stay in hospital for a long time, and can\u2019t go to school, the local authority should work with you to make arrangements for you to continue with your education. Sometimes you may not feel well enough to do any school work, but when you do feel well enough, you should be able to carry on with work from school. Find out more about your rights to education here."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/health/medical-information/": ["Whenever you go to see a doctor or nurse, or go to hospital, details of the visit and any advice and treatment will be recorded in your medical records Your medical information should be kept confidential You can have a say about who sees your medical records", "Privacy is about having control over how much of yourself other people can find out about. One of the areas of your life where you might want privacy is around anything to do with your health. You may not want people, including your parents or carers, to know that you have been to see a doctor. It should be up to you who knows whether you have been to see a doctor and what you have discussed. Your right to privacy also covers your medical records \u2013 these are a record of every time you have been to see a doctor or been to hospital and the treatment you had or advice that was given. You should be able to decide who sees your medical records.", "Your doctor has to keep anything you tell them private \u2013 although he or she will add details of your problem and any advice or treatment to your medical records. If you\u2019re worried, you can tell the doctor that you don\u2019t want him or her to tell anyone else without asking your permission.", "Your doctor might suggest that you tell someone about what\u2019s happening, so that you have the right support, but unless it\u2019s an emergency, they can\u2019t tell anyone without your permission.", "If it is an emergency and the doctor thinks that you or someone else is in danger, the doctor can tell someone about what you\u2019ve told them, without your permission. If the doctor is going to do this, they should tell you, so you will know who is going to be told. They might not tell your parent. The doctor might feel that they should tell a social worker or the police about something you have told them. The doctor has to decide whether telling someone else is more important that keeping the information confidential.", "If you\u2019re not old enough to make a decision about the treatment you need, someone else needs to make that decision for you, and give consent for the treatment. The doctors can\u2019t go ahead with any treatment without \u2018consent\u2019 unless it\u2019s an emergency.", "Normally, your doctor will ask your parents or someone with parental responsibility to make a decision about your treatment and give consent for it to happen. To do this, they need information to make that decision. A doctor might decide that it is in your best interests to pass information on to your parents or carer so that they can make a decision about your treatment. They can do this even if you don\u2019t agree, although the doctor should tell you that they are going to tell your parents.", "Medical records are the details that are kept by doctors, nurses and other people involved in your medical treatment when you see them. . Your medical records will include things like whether you have any allergies, if you have ever broken any bones and any illnesses or treatment you have had before.", "Different people involved in your treatment at different times can access your medical records and medical information. This means that a doctor can see what has happened to you in the past. By having all your medical records in one place, it means that doctors can take account of anything important that has happened in the past.", "You can ask to see your medical records, and you should be able to see them. Doctors are allowed to keep back any information in your records which might cause you harm, or any information which is about someone else, unless that person agrees to you seeing the information. If you don\u2019t have \u2018capacity\u2019, your parents can ask to see your medical records. The doctors should allow them to see the information unless it wouldn\u2019t be in your best interests to see the information.", "Your medical records are confidential which means they are private and only certain people can see them.", "Doctors or nurses who are treating you can see your medical records \u2013 and it\u2019s important that they do so that they make sure they give you the right treatment.", "When you are very young, your parents or people with parental responsibility for you can see your medical records. Once you have capacity, you have the right to say who can see your medical records. This means that if you don\u2019t want your parents or the person (or people) with parental responsibility for you to see them, you can say so."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/health/injections-and-the-school-nurse/": ["Your rights give you and your parents control over decisions about medical treatment in the widest sense, including routine vaccinations and injections Before you make a decision to have a vaccination or not, you have the right to have information about what the injection involves and why it is recommended Your right to confidentiality extends to discussions you have with the school nurse", "Injections are used as a way of protecting you against some illnesses and diseases that would otherwise be dangerous to your health. It\u2019s recommended that you have injections when you are a baby, and then further injections as you get older. Many of these take place at school because it\u2019s a convenient place for lots of people to have the same injection.", "When you are a baby, the people responsible for you \u2013 your parents or someone else with parental responsibility for you \u2013 will make the decision whether or not you should have the injection that is offered. As you get older, you will be able to make the decision whether or not to have the injection.", "In Wales, no one can force you to have an injection. The injections are offered are there to protect you and your health. They also help protect everyone around you and stops the spread of some diseases and illnesses. You need to understand that if you don\u2019t have the injections, you won\u2019t be protected from these illnesses, but there is no law that says you have to have the usual injections that are offered.", "If you don\u2019t want to have the injection in school along with everyone else, you can ask to have it at your doctor\u2019s surgery.", "You have rights to allow you to develop healthily, and to have good quality healthcare. In Wales, the school nursing service is one way the government is trying to make sure this happens. The school nurse service helps with health in schools generally, but can also help if you have a particular need or problem. The school nurse has to keep anything you discuss confidential in the same way that a doctor at your GP surgery or at hospital has to keep your information confidential. You can find out more about this here.", "The services the school nurse can offer will be different depending on whether you are at secondary school or primary school.", "You should be able to talk to the school nurse in Welsh if that is your \u2018first\u2019 language. If you don\u2019t speak English or Welsh and need to talk to the school nurse about something, you should be able to have someone available to translate for you so you can discuss your problem."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/health/staying-healthy/": ["Health isn\u2019t just about doctors and hospitals \u2013 it\u2019s about how you live, where you live and how you are looked after You have rights to make sure that you be able to grow and develop healthily, and hopefully avoid going to the doctor or spend time in hospital most of the time You still have these rights even if are living with a disability or a condition which means that your health is not as good as you might like it to be.", "What rights do you have to stay healthy? The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child includes the right to grow and develop healthily, to have nutritious food and clean water, and to understand how to keep yourself safe.", "What we eat has a big impact on our health, and you have the right to healthy food and clean water. Sometimes it can be hard to tell which foods are healthy and which aren\u2019t. Food should be properly labelled so you know what\u2019s in it. There are some ingredients that may not be suitable for you as a child because of the effects it can have, and these have to be included on the label.", "Some shops and supermarkets use a food labelling system which marks in green orange or red the amount of sugar, fat and salt the food contains. This is helpful for you to decide whether something is better for you, but it isn\u2019t compulsory for food to be labelled like this.", "It\u2019s also important that food is labelled properly so that you don\u2019t eat something that you are allergic to, or which could harm you another way.", "Being able to get enough exercise is part of your right to grow and develop healthily. If you go to school, you should have PE and games lessons, and have the opportunity to exercise during breaks and lunchtimes as sports clubs. The places where you live should have space where you can play. Local Authorities in Wales should think about making sure you have access to open spaces like parks when they plan buildings and development in your area.", "You have a right to be protected from any activities that could harm your development and wellbeing. A lot of the time, this is done with rules that say you can\u2019t do something until a certain age. You aren\u2019t allowed to drink alcohol until you are 18. You aren\u2019t allowed to buy cigarettes until you are 18. Lots of drugs such as cannabis are illegal \u2013 so it\u2019s always against the law to have these things in your possession, or to use them.", "Adults aren\u2019t allowed to smoke in a car with someone who is under 18 \u2013 but you might find it hard to talk to the adult who is smoking and make them stop.", "You should also be protected from sexual abuse, sexual exploitation and from abuse and neglect by your parents. All of these things can have an impact on your health and your development. If something like this is happening to you, you may be worried or scared about telling anyone, but you should try and find someone you trust to talk to, and so that things can be done to make sure you are safe and protected from future harm. The people who will be involved in helping you \u2013 social workers, people at court, the police - should listen to what you want as part of this.", "We talk a lot about physical health \u2013 what happens to our bodies, and whether our bodies are working properly. Sometimes we forget that what\u2019s happening in our mind, and to our mental health is just as important.", "Your rights to health apply to mental health as much as they do to your physical health. If you are feeling unhappy or you are self-harming, or doing something like not eating properly, or making yourself sick after eating, these are all signs that you might need to see a doctor about your mental health.", "Sometimes, mental health problems come from problems we\u2019re having at school or at home, or because we\u2019re having problems with our physical health. This could be because someone is bullying you, or someone at home is hurting you or something else. You have rights to protect you from this kind of behaviour.", "There are lots of reasons why you may not have good health, or have a medical problem that means you do need to spend time in hospital, or visiting your doctor or specialist clinics. If you have any kind of disability, you should be supported so that you get the help you need to live well and be able to take part in the community where you live, including getting an education, enjoying play, and being able to get proper health care and training so you can work."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/health/contraception-and-pregnancy/": ["Your doctor or nurse shouldn\u2019t tell anyone if you talk to them about anything to do with sex, unless they are worried that you are being exploited or abused You should be able to get contraception, and help and support if you are pregnant Your children\u2019s rights are there to protect you from being forced to have sex if you don\u2019t want to \u2013 but also to keep you safe if you do want to have sex", "Finding out about sex and contraception is part of your development and you should be able to have accurate information that means you can make the right choices. You might not want to talk to your parents or carer about this, but there are doctors and nurses who will be able to talk to you and give you any help you need, without telling your parents if you don\u2019t want them to.", "Contraception is something that will stop you getting pregnant if you have sex. There are different kinds of contraception, including pills that you take every day, hormone patches which you wear on your skin like a plaster, or implants, or \u2018barrier\u2019 contraception like condoms.", "If you\u2019re over 16, you can talk to a doctor or nurse about contraception and sex and get a prescription for contraception without any other adult being involved. The only time this might not happen is if the doctor was worried that you didn\u2019t fully understand what was involved.", "If you\u2019re under 16, you can talk to a doctor or nurse on your own and they must keep everything confidential unless they are worried that you are at risk of harm, like sexual abuse or exploitation. If the doctor is happy that you understand the implications of contraception, what\u2019s involved, and any risks, he or she can also give you contraception without your parents knowing.", "If you had sex without contraception, there\u2019s a possibility that you could be pregnant. If you don\u2019t want this, you can get emergency contraception which will reduce the risk of you getting pregnant. Your doctor, or a sexual health clinic should be able to give you a prescription for emergency contraception, even if you are under 16, as long as they are happy that you understand the implications. In Wales, some chemists and pharmacies can give you emergency contraception for free without a prescription.", "You have to take emergency contraception very soon after you have had unprotected sex for it to work, so if you\u2019re worried about being pregnant, go and see your doctor as soon as possible.", "Although the doctor has to keep your discussions confidential, he or she may try and persuade you to talk to your parents or carer about what\u2019s going on, to make sure you have the right kind of support.", "If you think you might be pregnant, you can get a pregnancy test done by your doctor or at a sexual health clinic for free, or you can buy a pregnancy test in most chemists or pharmacies, and sometimes in the supermarket. If you are pregnant there are lots of decisions that you will have to take. You should be given enough information to be able to make those decisions.", "If you go and see your doctor for a pregnancy test, he or she should keep this confidential and not tell anyone, including your parents if you don\u2019t want this to happen. As with other discussions you have with your doctor, he or she will only tell someone else without your permission if he or she is worried that you are in danger, or at risk of harm."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/shops/my-rights/": ["You have rights if you are treated differently and unfairly when you want to buy something You have rights if you buy something and it isn\u2019t what you expected You should feel able to complain if something isn\u2019t what you expected", "When you buy something you are a \u2018consumer\u2019 no matter how old you are. You can expect that the things you buy will do what they are supposed to, and won\u2019t be damaged or broken. If what you have bought isn\u2019t what you expected, you can usually return it and get your money back \u2013 your consumer rights say how this will happen.", "If you are treated differently and unfairly when you are buying something, this could be discrimination, and may be against the law.", "The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) protects you until you\u2019re 18. Making sure you are treated properly, and that you are protected from harm. Your rights under the UNCRC are mostly connected with the way you are treated by public bodies like the government, the police and local authorities. In Wales, your right not to be treated differently and unfairly by someone selling things you might want to buy comes from this. The UK Government has made rules that mean that you shouldn\u2019t be treated differently and unfairly because of your sex or race or religion. These apply when you are buying things, or using services, so you shouldn\u2019t be treated differently.", "You also have the right to be protected from harm \u2013 so there are laws in place which mean that you can\u2019t buy somethings because they would be dangerous to you.", "Consumer rights are rights that everyone who buys something in Wales have. They are rights that make sure you can get your money back if you buy something and it breaks or doesn\u2019t do what it says it should do. These rights don\u2019t come from the UNCRC but they are important because they mean that you shouldn\u2019t be taken advantage of because you are younger.", "In this section of the website we look at", "Things that you might not be able to do because of your age Things that you might not be able to buy because of your age What can you do if you are treated unfairly when you are buying something What you can do if you buy something and it isn\u2019t what you were expecting"], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/shops/im-not-allowed-to-buy-something/": ["Age restrictions are in place on buying some things to keep you safe and protect your health People who sell age restricted products to you are breaking the law There is no other legal reason why you can\u2019t buy things, and you shouldn\u2019t be treated unfairly for any reason", "Your rights are important to keep you safe. Other people, other children and adults, also have rights to keep them safe. One way the government in Wales (and in the UK) tries to keep everyone safe is to limit the sale of things that can be dangerous. This means that you have to be a certain age before you can buy some things. This includes things that can be dangerous to you and your health and wellbeing, and also things that you could use to harm other people.", "Although there can be age restrictions on buying some things, you shouldn\u2019t be treated unfairly for any reason if you are trying to buy something that is not age restricted.", "There are age restrictions on some products to protect your health and well-being, and to keep communities safe. Some products, like cigarettes and alcohol, are recognised as being very harmful to everyone\u2019s health. Some, like knives or fireworks, can be used to disrupt life for other people and cause harm. There are laws in place that mean shops are not allowed to sell these products to people until they have reached a certain age. In some cases, there may be other restrictions too, as well as an age restriction.", "Yes. The people who sell these products are usually responsible for checking how old someone is before they buy one of these age-restricted products. They will be breaking the law if they do sell to you.", "There is no other legal reason why you should be stopped from buying something. You may have traditional rules or values linked to your culture or religion that mean you shouldn\u2019t buy certain things, but unless these are age restricted, the law in Wales won\u2019t stop you from buying them.", "Cigarettes You have to be 18 to buy cigarettes in Wales.", "Pets You have to be 16 to buy a pet without an adult.", "Lottery tickets You can\u2019t buy a lottery ticket until you are 16", "Fireworks You have to be 18 to buy most fireworks", "To find out about other products and services which are age restricted in law, go to our \u2018When Can I\u2026? section", "The people and organisations that sell these products are responsible for making sure that you are old enough to buy them. If they sell you something when you are not old enough, they will be breaking the law. The Local Authority is usually responsible for making sure that age restrictions that are in place because of a law are being respected. Age-restricted products usually have the age restriction on them, or signs and information about age restrictions will be displayed by the products where they are for sale.", "In some cases, an older person who buys something and then gives it to you, will be committing an offence.", "You have the right to have information about what you can\u2019t buy, and why you\u2019re not allowed to buy it. If there is a danger involved in any activity, the person or organisation providing the service has to be very clear about what the rules are and the risks involved. If you are allowed to do something when it wasn\u2019t clear that it would not be appropriate for someone of your age, the organisation could be breaking the law, and might be prosecuted. Even if it is not prosecuted for breaking the law, it might have been negligent if you are hurt.", "You can carry a document like a passport that proves how old you are. If you don\u2019t want to take your passport around, or don\u2019t have a passport, you can get a proof of age card through the PASS scheme which will confirm that you are over 18.", "Although the responsibility is on the person or organisation providing the service to make sure you are old enough, if you pretend you are older than you are to buy something, you might also be breaking the law. You will be committing fraud if you use a false ID to pretend that you are older than you are to buy something. This could mean you get into trouble with the police.", "Depending on what you have, it may be confiscated from you. If you have alcohol in a public place, it can be taken away from you. If you are searched because the police think you have something that you shouldn\u2019t have, like a weapon, this can also be confiscated. In some cases, you could end up in trouble with the police."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/shops/ive-been-treated-unfairly/": ["You shouldn\u2019t be treated unfairly when you\u2019re at the shops or using services Businesses and organisations are allowed to treat you differently if you\u2019re under 18, as long as otherwise you are treated the same as everyone else If you are being treated unfairly, you can complain", "The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child says that, as a child, you shouldn\u2019t be discriminated against for any reason. This means that you shouldn\u2019t be treated differently and unfairly. In Wales, the Equality Act 2010 says that this applies to services that you might want or need to use, although you can be treated differently because of your age if you are under 18. This means that you might not be able to buy something or do something because of your age \u2013 but you shouldn\u2019t be treated differently for any other reason.", "Shops and organisations providing services are allowed to say that you can\u2019t do something because of your age. Some shops restrict the number of children that can go in at a time. Some places say that there can be no children at any time. The law says that this is OK.", "Shops that sell things that are \u2018age-restricted\u2019 like cigarettes and alcohol must not sell these things to anyone who isn\u2019t old enough. This means you are treated differently to people who are older than the age, but this is also allowed.", "In most cases, it should not matter whether you are a boy or a girl or what your race or religion is \u2013 you should be allowed to buy things and access services equally.", "In some cases, an organisation is allowed to restrict itself to one group of people. They can do this if the reason is to help a group of people who all have the same \u2018characteristic\u2019 (being a boy or a girl, or being a particular race or religion), and who have a disadvantage because of it. The aim of the group or organisation should be to encourage them and help them reduce that disadvantage. This is why Girl Guides in Wales only allows girls to join and not boys, even though girls and boys can join Scouts.", "You shouldn\u2019t be prevented from doing something just because you don\u2019t speak Welsh. Some organisations in Wales run their activities mostly through the medium of Welsh as a way of promoting use of the Welsh language. This means that you might find it more difficult to understand what\u2019s going on, but you shouldn\u2019t be prevented from taking part.", "An organisation that is providing services to the public or a section of the public, shouldn\u2019t discriminate against you (treat you differently and unfairly) because of a disability. Service providers also have to think generally about making their business or service accessible to everyone \u2013 not just wait until someone with a disability wants to use their service.", "Any business or organisation that is providing a service that you want to use has to do anything that might be reasonable to make sure that you can access their service. This means that they have to think in advance about what sort of disabilities people have, and how they can make things easier for them. It could include things like making sure entrances are easy for people in wheelchairs to use, or putting up signs in braille. What is \u2018reasonable\u2019 depends on what would be involved, what the cost is and how big the organisation is. It may be reasonable for a smaller organisation with less money to do less than a larger organisation with more money.", "There are age-restrictions fixed by law that mean you can\u2019t buy somethings or do somethings until you\u2018re a certain age. These restrictions are designed to protect you. Other things that aren\u2019t restricted by law might still be harmful to you, particularly if you are young, or if you have a particular condition.", "It is OK to restrict things based on age \u2013 so if an organisation says it will not offer its services to you if you\u2019re under a certain age, this would be acceptable.", "If an organisation says you can\u2019t do something because you have a disability, and it would be dangerous for you, this could be discrimination. You (or the people looking after you) should be able to know what the risks are and make a decision about whether to go ahead or not. So for example, if a show uses the kind of lighting that could be a problem if you have epilepsy, the theatre should make it clear that this type of lighting will be used. The business or organisation should have looked at what it does and made adjustments to make it easier for people with disabilities.", "No, an organisation doesn\u2019t have to stop offering a particular service or activity because you can\u2019t take part in it. It does have to see if it can make adjustments so that you could take part in it. This won\u2019t always be possible, or it might be too expensive for the organisation to make the necessary changes, but it must look into making changes and make any that are \u2018reasonable\u2019.", "No! It is for the business to pay for the changes it has to make.", "You can complain to the organisation that has treated you unfairly. They should investigate your complaint. If they agree that they have treated you unfairly, they might apologise, and they might make changes for the future so that you and others aren\u2019t treated unfairly again.", "If you don\u2019t want to complain to the organisation, or you have done and you aren\u2019t happy with the answer you have received, you might want to make a court claim for discrimination. This might feel like a big step to take, but you can get support from organisations like the Equality Advisory and Support Service."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/shops/im-not-allowed-to-do-something/": ["Your rights protect you from anything that harms your health and development There are age restrictions on some activities which are designed to protect you from harm  Although there can be age restrictions on some things that you can do, you shouldn\u2019t be treated unfairly otherwise", "Until you are 18, your rights are there to make sure you can grow and develop healthily. You shouldn\u2019t come into contact with anything that would harm your development. This can include things that you see, hear and do as well as stuff that you can buy to use. Although the specific reasons why you can\u2019t do something until a certain age will depend on what the activity or service is, age restrictions are in place to protect you from harm, and in some cases to protect other people too.", "Not all age restrictions will be there because there is a law that puts it there, but there may be other reasons why you can\u2019t do something until you are old enough. Businesses and organisations can limit the services they offer to children based on age, but generally, they cannot treat you unfairly for any other reason.", "As well as the sale of some products being restricted, so that you can only buy certain things once you\u2019re a certain age, some activities and services are also age restricted. These could include things like theme park rides, or having a social media account. It will depend on what you want to do or which service you want to use, but usually the restrictions are in place to protect you from harm. In some cases, activities may also be age restricted to protect other people too.", "Yes. Normally, people who provide services have to allow everyone access to their services equally, but they are allowed to treat people differently according to age. Some activities might not be harmful to you \u2018physically\u2019 \u2013 so you won\u2019t be physically hurt if you are below the age limit \u2013 but it might have an impact on you emotionally or mentally. An example of this might be watching a film meant for adults.", "There might be safety reasons that mean you can\u2019t do something because of your height or your weight. You might have to be at least a certain height or weight to do something to keep you safe. There are some activities that might be designed for younger children that you won\u2019t be able to do if you are too tall or too heavy.", "You shouldn\u2019t be stopped from doing something because you wear glasses, but occasionally you may find an activity that you can\u2019t do if you are wearing glasses. Depending on the reason why you wear glasses, this could be discrimination on grounds of disability. If there is a good safety reason why you can\u2019t wear your glasses while you are doing the activity, the organisation may be able to do this. You may find other restrictions that limit access to a service if you use a wheelchair or some other equipment to help you day to day. You can find out more about being treated unfairly when you want to access a service here.", "Adventurous activities You may have to be a particular age to do certain adventurous activities like abseiling or sailing. It will depend on whether you are going with an organisation or if you are going as a private group with someone you know and who isn\u2019t being paid for the trip. An organisation that is taking children to do adventurous activities will have to think carefully about what the activities are and whether it would be safe for children of a certain age to do the activity.", "Some organisations may not be able to get insurance to cover them for certain activities, and could be breaking the law if they allow someone to do an activity when it isn\u2019t safe for them.", "Fairground rides Some fairground rides have height, and in some cases weight, restrictions on them. These will be to keep you safe. Height restrictions are usually in place so that you aren\u2019t hurt during the ride. Often, the harnesses that are designed to keep you safe are only appropriate for people once they are a certain height, or under a certain weight. Some rides, designed for younger children, won\u2019t be safe or appropriate if you are taller.", "Films and computer games Films and computer games are classified according to age by law to make sure they are only watched or played by people who are old enough to understand them properly and not be upset or influenced by what they are seeing.", "Social media There\u2019s no law which says how old you have to be to have a social media account, or an email address, but different social media platforms and email providers may have a minimum age for an account.", "To find out about other services, and products which are age restricted in law, go to our \u2018When Can I\u2026? section", "The Local Authority is usually responsible for making sure that age restrictions that are in place because of a law are respected. The Health and Safety Executive is responsible for making sure that adventurous activities are carried out safely, even if there is no set age limit for the activity. These organisations are interested in making sure that the people or businesses that provide services don\u2019t let anyone who is too young carry out the activity.", "If there is no law, but an organisation has an age limit, or another restriction, for a good reason, that organisation will have its own way of dealing with it.", "Your parents have the responsibility for looking after you and making sure you are protected from harm. If you shouldn\u2019t do something until you are a certain age, your parents or the people with parental responsibility for you, should respect that.", "If someone finds out you aren\u2019t old enough, they probably won\u2019t let you carry on. If you\u2019re already doing the activity, they might stop and ask you to leave \u2013 but they will have to make sure that you will be safe.", "If there is a danger involved in any activity, the person or organisation providing the service has to be very clear about what the rules are and the risks involved. If you are allowed to do something when it wasn\u2019t clear that it would not be appropriate for someone of your age, the organisation could be breaking the law, and might be prosecuted. Even if it is not prosecuted for breaking the law, it might have been negligent if you are hurt.", "Most of the time, the responsibility is on the person or organisation providing the service to make sure the service is only used by people who are old enough. It is their responsibility to make sure people using their service are kept safe. If your parents or the people looking after you knew you weren\u2019t old enough, and put you at risk, may be by saying you were old enough to do something when you weren\u2019t, it is possible that they might be investigated. This would probably only happen if you were hurt as a result."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/shops/i-didnt-get-what-i-wanted/": ["Your rights when you buy something are the same as anyone else in Wales who has bought something or used a service. These \u2018consumer rights\u2019 aren\u2019t covered by the UNCRC but they are still important In most cases, it doesn\u2019t matter whether you bought something in a shop or online \u2013 you still have rights", "You might not think you have \u2018rights\u2019 when it comes to what you buy at the shops. These aren\u2019t \u2018rights\u2019 covered in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC), but they are an important part of how you should be treated. Rights you have in connection with things you buy are called \u2018consumer rights\u2019. They are there to protect you if something you bought was damaged, or even if you just decide you don\u2019t want it. Although you can usually return something, there are time limits that apply.", "If you think the reason the thing you bought or the service that you paid for was not what you wanted or was for a reason to do with you \u2013 because of your sex or race or because you have a disability \u2013 then you may have been discriminated against. This is something that the UNCRC covers.", "If you buy something and you decide you don\u2019t want it, you can usually return it if you haven\u2019t used it. If what you have bought isn\u2019t broken or damaged itself, you\u2019ve just decided that you don\u2019t want it, you will have to see what the return policy is at the shop where you bought it. Shops don\u2019t have to take back goods that aren\u2019t damaged or faulty in some way, but many do. If a shop does have a returns policy, it has to treat you the same as anyone else who wants to return something. If it doesn\u2019t, then depending on the reason, it may be discrimination. Find out more about this here.", "If you buy something online or over the phone, or by mail order, you can cancel your order at any time up till 14 days after you receive the goods. Once you\u2019ve cancelled your order, you have to send the goods back in another 14 days.", "If you buy something and it is faulty, you should be able to return it. As long as you take it back within 30 days, you can get your money back. If you leave it longer than 30 days, you can still take the thing you bought back, but you may only get a repair or a replacement rather than a refund of your money.", "If the seller has tried to repair your item, or offered you a replacement, and this isn\u2019t working for you, you can have a refund up to 6 months after you bought your item. After 6 months, you have to be able to show that what you bought was faulty when you first bought it. This can be difficult.", "If you bought something online, by phone or mail order and it doesn\u2019t work, you can return it for a full refund in the same way as if you bought it in a shop.", "If you received poor service and you think you were treated differently and unfairly because of something like your age, your gender or your race or religion, you may have been discriminated against. It is against the law (and your rights) to be discriminated against on the grounds of your age or sex, your sexual orientation, your race or religion, a disability or if you are pregnant, as well as whether you are married and because of gender reassignment.", "If you are discriminated against for one of these reasons, you may be able to bring a legal claim. You can find out more about being treated unfairly here.", "If you bought something and it turns out to be different from what the advertising says, you can complain to the Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) about the advert. You can also complain to the ASA if you think an advert is inappropriate (even if it\u2019s not related to something you want to do or buy). You can find out more about the ASA on its website."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/on-the-street/my-rights/": ["Part of your parents\u2019 job (or the job of the people with parental responsibility for you) is to make sure you understand how to be safe when you\u2019re out on the street There are laws which are there to tell everyone how to behave and so protect you from any danger you might face If you find yourself in trouble with the police, your human rights mean you should be treated properly", "If you\u2019re out on the street without an adult, it might seem like a different set of rules applies. You\u2019re not at home or school, where someone else can easily tell you what to do or how to do something. Your parents or the people with parental responsibility for you should teach you how to be safe when you\u2019re out. As you get older you should be able to go out and meet friends on your own. You should be free to do this as long as you don\u2019t stop other people enjoying their rights.", "The main right you have as a child/young person on the street is the right to be able to meet with your friends. You should be free to do this as long as you don\u2019t stop other people enjoying their rights.", "The law protects you in other ways when you\u2019re out \u2013 laws about driving, and laws aimed at preventing you being attacked or kidnapped. The law also puts limits on how you can behave so that other people aren\u2019t hurt or threatened by you.", "In this section of the website, we look at:", "Being with your friends Staying safe on the street Staying out of trouble Getting around Gangs Being on the street because you can't go home"], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/on-the-street/gangs/": ["\u2018Gang\u2019 means different things to different people There\u2019s nothing to stop you being part of a gang, but if you get involved in criminal activity, you could end up in trouble with the police If you\u2019ve been targeted by a gang, the best thing you can do is tell someone", "Being part of a gang might seem tempting if things aren\u2019t going well at school or at home, but if the gang is involved in breaking the law, you can quickly get into trouble with the police. Although you can join a gang if you want to, you should also be able to leave a gang. This can often be difficult for people who feel scared about what will happen if they try to get out. If you\u2019re targeted by a gang and are worried about what might happen, telling someone, like the police, is better than staying silent.", "The word \u2018gang\u2019 means different things to different people. In this part of the website, we\u2019re talking about gangs that are involved in breaking the law, often hurting other people and damaging property. This kind of gang is a group of people that are often together in public and see themselves as a group. Other people also recognise them as a specific group. The gang often break the law and will be involved in violence. They are often based in a particular area, and might use violence to try and control an area. A gang is often in conflict with other gangs.", "It is not illegal to be in a gang. You have a right in the UNCRC to meet with others and to join clubs and associations. While a \u2018gang\u2019 might not be what the United Nations was thinking about when it wrote Article 15, it would include being part of a gang. You are only allowed to meet up and associate with others if it doesn\u2019t stop other people enjoying their rights \u2013 and lots of things that these kind of gangs do are harmful to other people\u2019s rights. If you have to break the law to be in the gang, or to stay in the gang, this is when you can get into trouble with the police.", "Your right in Article 15 UNCRC means that you shouldn\u2019t have to join a gang if you don\u2019t want to. In reality it might be more difficult. Lots of gangs operate by threatening people, or their families, to make them join. If things are hard at home, being in a gang can be somewhere where you feel welcome even if it does mean involve doing things that you know aren\u2019t right. Some people think being in a gang will make them feel safer, or that it will make them money. If you\u2019re feeling under pressure to be in a gang but you don\u2019t want to be, you could tell the police, especially if you or your family are being threatened.", "Being in a gang is not a problem, but the gangs we\u2019re talking about in this section of the website will want you to be involved in violence and other criminal activity \u2013 it\u2019s part of the culture. This means you\u2019re more likely to get in trouble with the police and end up with a criminal record which can cause big problems as you look for work.", "You can get in trouble with the police if someone else in the gang uses violence or is carrying a weapon, even if you aren\u2019t directly involved. If you knew about it, then you can be arrested and taken to court for being part of a \u2018joint enterprise\u2019.", "You may find yourself under pressure to have sex with people you don\u2019t want to, and even made to have sex with other people for money. You may also end up under pressure to drink and take drugs which can have a damaging effect on your health.", "Your right under Article 15 UNCRC means that if you don\u2019t want to be part of a group \u2013 or a gang \u2013 you don\u2019t have to be, but it can be difficult to leave, especially if you don\u2019t have much support at home, and feel like you have no alternative. If you end up in trouble with the police and spend time somewhere like a Young Offender Institution, a Secure Training Centre or Secure Children\u2019s Home, you may be able to get help and support to feel confident enough that you won\u2019t go back to the gang when you get out.", "If you are being threatened by a gang either to join them, or because the gang has decided to target you for some reason, the best thing you can do is tell the police. You might feel like you can\u2019t or shouldn\u2019t tell anyone, or that you will be attacked if you do report what has happened. If you don\u2019t tell anyone what has happened, nothing will change. If you do tell the police, they can help you and protect you from any more violence."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/on-the-street/being-with-my-friends/": ["You have the right to be friends with whoever you want You have the right to get together with your friends The only reason you can be stopped from getting together with friends and others is if it means other people are stopped from enjoying their rights", "As a child, you have a right to meet with other young people, and to join clubs and organisations. Your parents are responsible for you until you\u2019re 18 so they may have rules about when you can go out with your friends and where you can go, but in general you should have the freedom to make friends and spend time with them. If you stop other people enjoying their rights \u2013 for example by ganging up on someone else or by damaging property, you may end up in trouble with the police.", "You can be friends with whoever you like (and that means you don\u2019t have to be friends with someone you don\u2019t want to be friends with). You can spend time with your friends at school or clubs that you belong to, or after school you can meet with your friends.", "If you\u2019re at your house, or someone else\u2019s house, then you are free to meet with your friends as long as the people who own the house (probably one of your parents or carers) are happy with you being there.", "If you\u2019re out in public and are making other people feel scared or worried, or you\u2019re drinking alcohol, the police may get involved. Find out more about Staying out of Trouble.", "Your parents or carer, or people with parental responsibility for you may set rules about when you can go out and what time you have to be home as part of their responsibility to look after you. If you can\u2019t get to where your friends are without your parents taking you, you may find it hard to hang out with your friends every time you want to.", "Your parents or carer might think that it is not in your best interests to spend time with certain people. The younger you are, the harder it might be to spend time with your friends if you and your parents disagree about who you should hang out with and when you can go out. As you get older, you should have more freedom to decide who you want to spend time with.", "You should be able to join any club that\u2019s open to people of your age. Most clubs aren\u2019t allowed to treat people differently and unfairly for any reason \u2013 so you can join a club whether you are a boy or a girl, and whatever your race or religion.", "Some clubs might decide to take positive action to have members only from a particular group of children and young people who are disadvantaged. This is allowed as long as it\u2019s to help that particular group. This is the reason why Guides is allowed to be only for girls."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/on-the-street/on-the-street-because-i-cant-go-home/": ["In Wales, the human rights of children are recognised and government must have \u2018due regard\u2019 to the requirements of the UNCRC You have a right to be cared for and to an adequate standard of living If you\u2019re out on the street because you can\u2019t go home and you\u2019re under 18, you should be able to get help and support", "If you\u2019re under 18, the UNCRC applies to you. \u00a0\u00a0Normally, parents look after children and provide them with a safe place to live. Sometimes, this doesn\u2019t happen, so the local authority where you live should look after you instead. This might be foster care or in a children\u2019s home. Sometimes, though, even this doesn\u2019t work out. If you feel that you can\u2019t live with your parents or stay in the arrangements that the Local authority made for you for some reason \u2013 either you can\u2019t get on with the people you\u2019re supposed to live with or you\u2019re being hurt or abused. If you feel you have nowhere to go and end up on the street, you still have your rights, and the local authority and other organisations should help make sure you are safe and have somewhere appropriate to live.", "If you\u2019re 16 or 17, and homeless, or at risk of being homeless, you are counted as being a \u2018priority need\u2019 \u2013 which means you are someone who should have particular help to get suitable accommodation.", "Every local authority in Wales has to run a free information and advice service to help you find out about your housing rights and getting somewhere to live.", "You have to apply to the Local authority and they will do an assessment to see if you\u2019re eligible for accommodation. The Local authority will make an assessment of all your needs \u2013 not just your need for housing, but your need for support so that you can stay living in that accommodation.", "The local authority should find somewhere for you to live temporarily while your assessment for housing takes place.", "If you are assessed for housing, the local authority will ask about why you are homeless or threatened with homelessness. If you don\u2019t want to go home because you are at risk of abuse, the Local authority should provide you with accommodation.", "No one can make you go back home once you are 16 \u2013 but the local authority may try and help you sort things out (if this is possible) so that you can live with your family, or in the foster care or children\u2019s home where you have been living.", "If you are younger than 16, and you end up on the street, the local authority should look after you and make arrangements for you to have somewhere safe to live while they sort out what has happened. They should listen to you and make sure that they make decisions in your best interests. If this means that you shouldn\u2019t go back to your parents or carers, then they need to find somewhere else safe for you to live.", "Ultimately, no one can make you live somewhere you don\u2019t want to live, or stop you living somewhere. At the moment, it\u2019s not illegal to sleep on the street. Local authorities have powers to ban some activities, including rough sleeping, in particular areas, but using these powers too widely could lead to a breach of your human rights."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/on-the-street/staying-safe/": ["There are lots of things that happen out on the street that you can\u2019t control You can take steps to keep yourself safe when you\u2019re out and about If you\u2019re hurt or threatened or someone steals something from you when you\u2019re out and about, you can tell the police", "Staying safe when you are out and about and away from home, even if it\u2019s just going to the shops or the park is a lot about how other people behave. There are a lot of laws and rules in Wales that set out behaviour that isn\u2019t allowed. These laws and rules are aimed at making everyone feel safe when they are out in public. If people behave in ways that are dangerous or make you feel scared, they could be breaking the law, and can be punished.", "If you have information about any kind of crime, whether it's something that affects you, or something you've seen that affects someone else, you can report it anonymously to fearless.org.", "Some shops and businesses use devices which make a high-pitched noise to stop children and young people gathering there. They only work on young people because as people get older they can\u2019t hear the noises that are made by the devices. At the moment, there is no law in Wales that says these can\u2019t be used, although some people argue that they should be banned.", "Just as you shouldn\u2019t be threatened or hurt by an adult you live with, you shouldn\u2019t be threatened or hurt by an adult out in public. It doesn\u2019t matter if it\u2019s someone you know or someone you don\u2019t know. Remember too that no one is allowed to hit you except your parents (and in Wales this may change soon so that no one can hit you). If you are hurt or threatened by an adult, you should tell the police. If you\u2019re worried about going to the police or don\u2019t know how to do that, you could ask an adult you trust to help you.", "You should always be careful if someone you don\u2019t know, especially an adult, tries to start talking to you. They might try to persuade you to go somewhere different or to leave your friends. They might tell you that they\u2019ve got a message for you. Although it might be fine, you should always be careful to make sure you are safe \u2013 so don\u2019t go anywhere on your own with someone you don\u2019t know very well and always make sure someone knows where you are going.", "Some adults do want to hurt children, and may try to take you away. This is called kidnapping and an adult might take the opportunity to try and take a child from the street while they are out. This is a crime and an adult who takes a child away has broken the law. This means that if you are kidnapped, the police will have to investigate and look for you to make you safe.", "If the police think you have broken the law, they can arrest you and take you to a police station. They have to tell you what your rights are, and tell your parent or carer as soon as possible. Find out more about what will happen and your rights at the police station here.", "The police are there to protect you, but also to stop laws being broken and crimes being committed. If the police think that you have broken the law, they are allowed to stop you and ask you questions. They may be able to search you, and might arrest you and take you to the police station. They must themselves stay within the law, so they can\u2019t hit you or harm you and they should always respect you, and your rights.", "If you\u2019re being bullied by someone or a group of people, or they are making you feel scared or are hurting you, they are breaking the law. If they are under 10, they aren\u2019t old enough to be arrested or charged with a criminal offence, but that doesn\u2019t mean nothing can happen to them. If the other children or young people hurting you are 10 or over, their behaviour could well be a crime. You can tell the police, no matter what age you think the person hurting you is. \u00a0If you\u2019re living in social housing, and the child lives in the same area, you could tell your landlord what is happening.", "You have to decide what you want to do. It\u2019s illegal to drink alcohol in public if you\u2019re under 18, and it\u2019s illegal to use drugs however old you are. If you\u2019re found drinking or taking drugs in public, you might get arrested by the police. Even if you\u2019re not arrested, you might find yourself doing things you don\u2019t want to do or wouldn\u2019t have done if you hadn\u2019t drunk alcohol or taken drugs.", "If someone steals something from you it\u2019s a crime, so you should report it to the police.", "People are only allowed to carry a knife in Wales if they have a good reason. This might be something like they use a knife for work, and they are going to work \u2013 this might apply to a cook or chef.", "The only kind of knife people can carry is one with a folding blade, the cutting edge has to be less than 3 inches long, and it can\u2019t be a knife that has been banned. Most people won\u2019t have a good reason to have a knife with them. If the police think someone has a knife, they are allowed to stop and search that person.", "You can only have a gun if you have a firearms certificate. You have to be 18 or older to have one of these, so a child should never have a gun.", "Lots of weapons are also banned, including blowpipes, telescopic truncheons, and things like shurikens (or throwing stars) and knuckledusters.", "If you\u2019re worried that someone you know is carrying a knife, gun or other weapon, you should tell the police or an adult you trust and ask them to tell the police.", "You\u2019re not allowed to carry anything that has been made to hurt someone. Even something like a spray could hurt someone if it went in their eyes.", "The rules on guns, knives and weapons apply for whatever reason you want to have the weapon. If you\u2019re under 18, you can\u2019t have a gun (or an imitation gun) anyway. You can only carry a knife of a certain type if it\u2019s for a good reason \u2013 in Wales, it\u2019s not a good reason to carry a knife because you think you might be attacked.", "You are allowed to carry an attack alarm which lets off a siren when it is activated. This can scare off an attacker and alert other people that you are in trouble.", "There are laws that are supposed to keep you safe from cars and traffic when you\u2019re on the street. Drivers must follow the Highway Code, and it is against the law to drive when they have had too much to drink or if they have taken illegal drugs. People aren\u2019t allowed to drive dangerously, and shouldn\u2019t use their mobile phone while they are driving unless they have a proper \u2018hands free\u2019 kit to use. Drivers who are caught driving in a way that breaks the law can be punished. In some cases they will be banned from driving and could go to prison."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/on-the-street/what-can-i-and-cant-i-do/": ["As long as you don\u2019t stop anyone else from enjoying their rights", "You can cross the road on your own once you\u2019re old enough to understand how to cross the road safely. Your parents or people with parental responsibility for you should help you learn how to cross the road safely.", "As long as you\u2019re old enough to keep yourself safe.", "You can cycle on the road once you feel confident and can follow the Highway Code. You have to make sure your bike is in good condition and won\u2019t be dangerous when you ride it.", "You\u2019re not allowed to ride a bike on the pavement \u2013 it\u2019s illegal at any age, but if you\u2019re under 10, you can\u2019t be held criminally responsible. This doesn\u2019t mean you won\u2019t get into trouble, but it will be different to what might happen to someone 10 or older.", "You can ride a moped once you are 16 as long as you have a provisional licence and complete Compulsory Basic Training (CBT) before you ride it on the roads.", "Once you are 17 you can learn to drive a car. You have to have a provisional licence and pass your driving theory test before you can take your driving test.", "You can\u2019t buy alcohol until you\u2019re 18.", "Although you\u2019re allowed to drink alcohol at home, you aren\u2019t allowed to drink in a public place like a park, until you\u2019re 18 (and you can only drink in public once you\u2019re 18 if there are no local rules or byelaws that prevent it).", "If you are caught by the police drinking in a public place you can get fined or even arrested.", "If you\u2019re caught with alcohol in a public place and you\u2019re under 18, the police can take it off you. If this happens 3 times, you might get arrested and end up with a criminal record.", "You can only carry a knife if you\u2019ve got a good reason \u2013 like you need a knife for work and you are going to work when you have the knife with you. You can\u2019t carry a knife for \u2018self-defence\u2019 \u2013 this isn\u2019t a good reason to carry a knife. You can only have a gun once you are 18 and have a firearms certificate, and there are other banned weapons that you can\u2019t carry around with you when you\u2019re out.", "You can\u2019t smoke in an enclosed public space. In Wales, there is a \u2018voluntary ban\u2019 on smoking in children\u2019s playgrounds and on a small number of beaches too. The UN Committee on the Rights of the Child has recommended that smoking near play spaces should be banned, acting on research submitted by children under 11 in Wales.", "You can\u2019t set off or throw fireworks in the street or in a public place.", "This is the opposite side of your right to be able to meet and hang out with your friends. You can only do this is you don\u2019t behave in a way that upsets other people and means they don\u2019t have their rights. If you\u2019re behaving anti-socially, the police can tell you to leave an area \u2013 and in some cases can take you home."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/on-the-street/staying-out-of-trouble/": ["You\u2019re allowed to hang out with your friends and be out and about as long as you don\u2019t break the law or make it difficult for other people to enjoy their rights If you break the law, you may end up in trouble with the police Your human rights are there to protect you from being treated badly if you do get into trouble with the police", "How you exercise your rights and freedoms is limited by the need to respect the rights and freedoms of other people. If you\u2019re behaving in a way that stops other people enjoying their rights, or in a way that might be breaking the law, you may find yourself in trouble with the police or other authorities. Even though you may get into trouble, your other human rights apply \u2013 so you can\u2019t be treated differently and unfairly to anyone else, you should be given enough information to understand what is happening, and anything that happens to you has to be in your best interests. You shouldn\u2019t be treated cruelly or disrespectfully, and you should have legal advice and help.", "The police can stop you and ask you questions at any time. You don\u2019t have to answer the questions, and if you don\u2019t stop, you can\u2019t be arrested just for not stopping.", "They might ask you who you are, how old you are and where you are going.", "The police might be worried about your safety, or they might be worried that you are going to cause trouble.", "If the police think that you have something that has been stolen or that you aren\u2019t supposed to have \u2013 like fireworks, or a knife, they can stop you and search you. The police have to think that they are going to find what they are looking for \u2013 they can\u2019t just search you \u2018just in case\u2019.", "The police can also search you if they think you are carrying drugs \u2013 but again, they have to have a reason to think you have got some drugs on you.", "If you are behaving anti-socially, you could end up with an injunction which can tell you do stop behaving in a particular way, and can also require you to do certain things. This is called an Injunction to Prevent Nuisance and Annoyance (IPNA). This has replaced the Anti-Social Behaviour Order (ASBO).", "Anti-social behaviour means anything that might be capable of causing a nuisance or annoyance. No one actually has to be upset or annoyed for you to end up with an IPNA. If you\u2019re under 18, an application for an IPNA will be dealt with in the Youth Court. An IPNA can only last for 12 months if you\u2019re under 18.", "Lots of different organisations can apply for an IPNA against you, not just the police.", "You can also get an IPNA to stop you behaving in a particular way at home, not just out in public places.", "If the police think you are causing trouble for people in a particular place, they can tell you to leave and not to come back to that place for up to 48 hours. If you are under 16 (or the police think you are under 16), they can take you home, or to another safe place."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/on-the-street/getting-around/": ["As you get older, you may want to travel further away from home, to go to town or even a different town If you can\u2019t get around, you can\u2019t make the most of opportunities to experience new things You don\u2019t have a right to things like public transport \u2013 but you shouldn\u2019t be treated differently or unfairly when public transport is available", "Getting around is part of you getting independence. If you can get on a bus or train to visit someone or go somewhere it opens up more freedom and more opportunities. When you are younger, you will only be able to go somewhere if you can walk there or if an adult takes you. As you get older, you can walk further, or you might be able to go somewhere on your bike. You might also have access to buses or trains so that you can get to other places. Your human rights mean that you shouldn\u2019t be treated differently and unfairly if you\u2019re using public transport. There should also be laws in place to protect you, as a child, when you\u2019re travelling \u2013 either by walking, riding your bike or when you\u2019re in a moped or learning to drive.", "There\u2019s no minimum age you have to be before you can cross the road on your own. Your parents or the people with parental responsibility for you have to teach you how to cross a road safely (this is in the Green Cross Code which is part of the Highway Code). They shouldn\u2019t let you cross a road on your own until they are confident that you know the rules and understand how to cross a road safely.", "Like crossing the road, there\u2019s no minimum age when you can ride a bike on your own, but you have to understand the rules that apply and know how to be safe on the road.", "No one is allowed to cycle on a pavement so if you are riding your bike out and about, you should be on the road.", "You have to make sure your bike is safe to cycle. You will need lights if you\u2019re out after dark, and you need to think about how to make yourself visible to other people using the road, including car and lorry drivers, as well as pedestrians.", "You have to be 16 to ride a moped. You also have to have a provisional moped licence and have done Compulsory Bike Training (CBT) before you can take a moped out on the road.", "You can apply for a provisional driving licence once you\u2019re 15 and 9 months old. You have to be able to read a number plate form 20 metres away. You can start learning to drive when you\u2019re 17, as long as you have a provisional licence.", "You don\u2019t have to pay for driving lessons \u2013 you can just practice with another adult who is over 21 and has the right kind of driving licence, and is prepared to be in the car with you. If you do pay for driving lessons, it should be with a qualified driving instructor or trainee driving instructor.", "You have to have the right insurance to drive a car when you\u2019re learning to drive. You have to have an \u2018L\u2019 or \u2018D\u2019 plate on your car if you\u2019re a learner driver in Wales.", "You have to pass a theory test before you can take your driving test. Most people can take their theory test from your 17th birthday onwards.", "Once you have passed your test, you can drive without anyone with you in the car.", "There\u2019s no fixed age when you can start to go on public transport on your own. If you\u2019re very young, or seem to be upset or worried about being on public transport, someone like a bus driver or someone at a train station might ask you if you are OK. If you\u2019re using the train and the staff think you might be too young to be out alone, they might contact the British Transport Police and ask them to make sure you are alright. You won\u2019t be in trouble \u2013 they will just want to make sure nothing is wrong."], "https://childrenslegalcentre.wales/how-the-law-affects-me/in-trouble/my-rights-if-im-in-a-young-offenders-institute/": []}